--- PAGE 1 ---
 
Section-III 
SYLLABI FOR THE EXAMINATION 
PART-A 
PRELIMINARY EXAMINATION 
The Examination shall comprise two compulsory papers of 200 marks each. 
Paper I - (200 marks) Duration : Two hours 
 Current events of national an d international importance. 
 History of India and Indian National Movement. 
 Indian and World Geography - Physical, Soci al, Economic Geography of India and the World. 
 Indian Polity and Governance - Constitution, Political System, Panchayati Raj, Public Policy, Rights 
Issues, etc. 
 Economic and Social Development Sustainable Development, Poverty, Inclusion, Demographics, 
Social Sector initiatives, etc.  
 General issues on Environmental Ecology, Bio- diversity and Climate Chan ge - that do not require 
subject specialization.  
 General Science. 
 
Paper II- (200 marks) Duration: Two hours 
 Comprehension 
 Interpersonal skills including communication skills; 
 Logical reasoning and analytical ability 
 Decision-making and problem-solving 
 General mental ability 
 Basic numeracy (numbers and their relations, orders of magnitude, etc.) (Class X level), Data 
interpretation (charts, graphs, tables, data sufficiency etc. - Class X level)  
 English Language Comprehension skills (Class X level). 
 
Note 1 : Questions relating to English Language Comprehension skills of Class X level (last item in the Syllabus 
of PaperII) will be tested through passages from Englis h language only without providing Hindi translation 
thereof in the question paper. 
 
Note 2 : The questions will be of multiple choice, objective type. 
 
PART-B 
MAIN EXAMINATION 
The main Examination is intended to assess the ove rall intellectual traits and depth of understanding 
of candidates rather than merely the range of their information and memory. 
 
The nature and standard of questions in the G eneral Studies papers (Paper II to Paper V) will be 
such that a well-educated person will be able to an swer them without any specialized study. The questions 
will be such as to test a candidate’ s general  awareness of a variety of subjects, which will have relevance for 
a career in Civil Services. The questions are likely to test the candidate’ s basic understanding of all relevant 
issues, and ability to analyze, and take a view on conflicting socio- economic goals, objectives and demands. 
The candidates must give relevant, meaningful and succinct answers. 
 
The scope of the syllabus for optional subject papers (Paper VI and Paper VII) for the examination is 
broadly of the honours degree level i.e. a level higher than the bachelors’ degree and lower than the masters’ 
degree. In the case of Engineering, Medical Science and law, the level corresponds to the bachelors’ 
degree. 
 
Syllabi of the papers included in the scheme of Civil Services (Main) Examination are given as follows:- 
  
PAPER-I 
 
Essay: Candidates will be required to write an essay on a specific topic. The choice of subjects will be given. 
They will be expected to keep closely to the subject of th e essay to arrange their ideas in orderly fashion, and to 
write concisely. Credit will be given for effective and exact expression. 
 
English Comprehension & English Precis will be to te st the English language Comprehension and English 
précis writing skills (at 10th standard level). 
 
PAPER-II 
 
General Studies- I: Indian Heritage and Culture, History and Geography of the World and Society.  
 
 Indian culture will cover the salient aspects of Art Forms, Literature and Architecture from ancient to 
modern times. 
 
 Modern Indian history from about the middle of the eighteenth century until the present- significant 
events, personalities, issues 
 
 The Freedom Struggle - its various stages and important contributors /contributions from different 
parts of the country. 
 
 Post-independence consolidation and reorganization within the country. 
 
--- PAGE 2 ---
 History of the world will include events from 18th century such as industrial revolution, world wars, 
redrawal of national boundaries, colonization, decolonization, political philosophies like communism, 
capitalism, socialism etc.- their forms and effect on the society. 
 
 Salient features of Indian Society, Diversity of India. 
 
 Role of women and women’s organization, population and associated issues, poverty and 
developmental issues, urbanization, their problems and their remedies. 
 
 Effects of globalization on Indian society  
 
 Social empowerment, communalism, regionalism & secularism.   
 
 Salient features of world’s physical geography.  
 
 Distribution of key natural resources across the world (including South Asia and the Indian sub-
continent); factors responsible for the location of prim ary, secondary, and tertia ry sector industries in 
various parts of the world (including India) 
 
 Important Geophysical phenomena such as earthqu akes, Tsunami, Volcanic activity, cyclone etc., 
geographical features and their lo cation- changes in critical geogra phical features (including water-
bodies and ice-caps) and in flora and fauna and the effects of such changes. 
 
PAPER-III 
 
General Studies- II: Governance, Constitution, Polity, Social Justice and International relations.  
 
 Indian Constitution- historical underpinnings, evol ution, features, amendments, significant provisions 
and basic structure. 
 
 Functions and responsibilities of the Union and the States, issues and challenges pertaining to the 
federal structure, devolution of powers and finances up to local levels and challenges therein. 
 
 Separation of powers between various organs dispute redressal mechanisms and institutions. 
 
 Comparison of the Indian constitutional scheme with that of other countries 
 
 Parliament and State Legislatures - structure, functioning, conduct of business, powers & privileges 
and issues arising out of these. 
 
 Structure, organization and functioning of the Executive and the Judiciary Ministries and Departments 
of the Government; pressure groups and formal/informal associations and their role in the Polity.  
 
 Salient features of the Representation of People’s Act. 
 
 Appointment to various Constitutional posts, powers, functions and responsibilities of various 
Constitutional Bodies.  
 
 Statutory, regulatory and various  quasi-judicial  bodies 
 Government policies and interventions for development in various sectors and issues arising out of 
their design and implementation.  
 
 Development processes and the development industry- the role of NGOs, SHGs, various groups and 
associations, donors, charities, institutional and other stakeholders  
 
 Welfare schemes for vulnerable sections of th e population by the Centre and States and the 
performance of these schemes; mechanisms, laws, institutions and Bodies constituted for the 
protection and betterment of these vulnerable sections. 
 
 Issues relating to development and management of Social Sector/Services relating to Health, 
Education, Human Resources.   
 
 Issues relating to poverty and hunger.  
 
 Important aspects of governance, transparency and accountability,  e-governance- applications, 
models, successes, limitations, and potential; citizen s charters, transparency & accountability and 
institutional and other measures. 
 
 Role of civil services in a democracy. 
 
 India and its neighborhood- relations.  
 

 Bilateral, regional and global groupings and agreements involving India and/or affecting India’s 
interests  
 
 Effect of policies and politics of developed and de veloping countries on India’s interests, Indian 
diaspora.  
--- PAGE 3 ---
 
 Important International institutions, agencies and fora- their structure, mandate. 
 
PAPER-IV 
 
General Studies-III : Technology, Economic Development, Bio diversity, Environment, Security and 
Disaster Management. 
 
 Indian Economy and issues relating to planning, mobilization of resources, growth, development and 
employment. 
 
 Inclusive growth and issues arising from it.   
 
 Government Budgeting. 
 
 Major crops  cropping patterns in various parts of the country,   different types of irrigation and 
irrigation systems  storage, transport and marketing of agricultural produce and issues and related 
constraints; e-technology in the aid of farmers 
 
 Issues related to direct and indirect farm subsidies and minimum support prices; Public Distribution 
System- objectives, functioning, limitations, revamping;  issues of buffer stocks and food security; 
Technology missions;  economics of animal-rearing.  
 
 Food processing and related industries in India-  scope and significance, location, upstream and 
downstream requirements, supply chain management.  
 
 Land reforms in India. 
 
 Effects of liberalization on the economy, changes in  industrial policy and their effects on industrial 
growth. 
 
 Infrastructure: Energy, Ports, Roads, Airports, Railways etc.  
 
 Investment models.  
 
 Science and Technology- developments and their applications and effects in everyday life   
 
 Achievements of Indians in science & technology; indigenization of technology and developing new 
technology. 
 
 Awareness in the fields of IT, Space, Computers,  robotics, nano-technol ogy, bio-technology and 
issues relating to intellectual property rights. 
 
 Conservation, environmental pollution and degradation,  environmental impact assessment  
 
 Disaster and disaster management. 
 
 Linkages between development and spread of extremism. 
 
 Role of external state and non-state actors in creating challenges to internal security.   
 
 Challenges to internal security through communication networks, role of media and social networking 
sites in internal security challenges, basics of cyber security; money-laundering and its prevention 
 
 Security challenges and their management in border areas;    linkages of organized crime with 
terrorism 
 
 Various Security forces and agencies and their mandate  
 
 
PAPER-V 
 
General Studies- IV
:    Ethics, Integrity, and Aptitude  
 
This paper will include questions to test the candidates’ attitude and approach to issues relating to integrity, 
probity in public life and his problem solving approach to various issues and conflicts faced by him in dealing 
with society.  Questions may utilise the case study approach to determine these aspects.  The following broad 
areas will be covered.  
 
 Ethics and Human Interface: Essence, determ inants and consequences of Ethics in  
 human actions; 
dimensions of ethics; ethics   in private and public relationships.  Human Values – lessons from the 
lives and teachings of great lead ers, reformers and ad ministrators; role of family, society and 
educational institutions in inculcating   values.  
 
 Attitude: content, structure, function; its influence and relation with thought and behaviour; moral and 
political attitudes; social influence and persuasion. 
 
--- PAGE 4 ---
 Aptitude and foundational values for Civil Service ,  integrity, impartiality and non-partisanship, 
objectivity, dedication to public service, empathy,  tolerance and compassion towards the weaker-
sections.  
 
 Emotional intelligence-concepts, and their utilities and application in administration and governance.  
 
 Contributions of moral thinkers and philosophers from India and world. 
 
 Public/Civil service values and Ethics in Public administration: Status and problems; ethical concerns 
and dilemmas in government and private institutions; laws, rules, regulations and conscience as 
sources of ethical guidance; accountability and ethical governance; strengthening of ethical and moral 
values in governance; ethical issues in international relations and funding; corporate governance.  
 
 Probity in Governance: Concept of public service; Philosophical basis of governance and probity; 
Information sharing and transparency in government, Right to Information, Codes of Ethics, Codes of 
Conduct, Citizen’s Charters, Work culture, Quality of  service delivery, Utilization of public funds, 
challenges of corruption.    
 
 Case Studies on above issues.   
 
PAPER-VI & PAPER VII 
 
Optional Subject Papers I & II                                                 
 
Candidates may choose any optional subject from amongst the list of subjects given in para 2 (Group 1 ). 
However, if a candidate has graduated in any of th e literatures of languages indicated in Group-2  , with the 
literature as the main subject, then the candidate can also opt for that particular literature subject as an 
optional subject. 
 
 
AGRICULTURE 
PAPER - I 
Ecology and its relevance to man, natural resources, their sustainable management and conservation. Physical 
and social environment as factors of crop distribution and production. Agro ecology; cropping pattern as 
indicators of environments. Environmental pollution and associated hazards to crops, animals and humans. 
Climate change – International conve ntions and global initiatives. Green house effect and global warming. 
Advance tools for ecosystem analysis – Remote sensing (RS) and Geographic Information Systems (GIS). 
 
Cropping patterns in different agro-climatic zones of the country. Impact of high-yielding and short-duration 
varieties on shifts in cropping patterns. Concepts of  various cropping and farming systems. Organic and 
Precision farming. Package of practices  for production of important cereals, pulses, oil seeds, fibres, sugar, 
commercial and fodder crops.  
 
Important features and scope of various types of forestry plantations such as social forestry, agro-forestry, and 
natural forests.  
 
Propagation of forest plants. Forest products. Agro forestry and value addition. Conservation of forest flora and 
fauna.  
 
Weeds, their characteristics, dissemina tion and association with various crops; their multiplications; cultural, 
biological, and chemical control of weeds.   
 
Soil- physical, chemical and biological properties. Processes and factors of soil formation. Soils of India. 
Mineral and organic constituents of soils and their role in maintaining soil productivity. Essential plant 
nutrients and other beneficial elements in soils and plan ts. Principles of soil fertility, soil testing and fertilizer 
recommendations, integrated nutrient management.  Biof ertilizers. Losses of nitrogen in soil, nitrogen-use 
efficiency in submerged rice soils, nitrogen fixation in soils. Efficient phosphorus and potassium use. Problem 
soils and their reclamation. Soil factors affecting greenhouse gas emission. 
 
Soil conservation, integrated watershed management. Soil erosion and its management. Dry land agriculture 
and its problems. Technology for stabilizing agriculture production in rain fed areas. 
  
Water-use efficiency in relation to crop production, criteria for scheduling irrigations, ways and means of 
reducing run-off losses of irrigation water. Rainwater ha rvesting.  Drip and sprinkler irrigation. Drainage of 
waterlogged soils, quality of irrigation water, effect of industrial effluents on soil and water pollution. 
Irrigation projects in India. Farm management, scope, importance and characteristics, farm planning. Optimum 
resource use and budgeting. Economics of different types of farming systems. Marketing management – 
strategies for development, market intelligence. Price fl uctuations and their cost; role of co-operatives in 
agricultural economy; types and systems of farming and factors affecting them. Agricultural price policy. Crop 
Insurance. 
 
Agricultural extension, its importance and role, methods of evaluation of extension programmes, socio-
economic survey and status of big, small and marginal farmers and land less agricultural labourers. Training 
programmes for extension workers.  Role of Krishi Vigyan Kendra’s (KVK) in dissemination of Agricultural 
technologies.  Non Government Organization (NGO) and self-help group approach for rural development. 
 
--- PAGE 5 ---
PAPER - II 
Cell structure, function and cell cycle. Synthesis, structure and function of genetic material. Laws of heredity. 
Chromosome structure, chromosomal aberrations, linkage and cross-over, and their significance in 
recombination breeding. Polyploidy, euploids and aneuploids. Mutations – and their role in crop improvement. 
Heritability, sterility and incompatibility, classificatio n and their application in crop improvement. 
Cytoplasmic inheritance, sex-linked, sex-influenced and sex-limited characters. 
 
History of plant breeding. Modes of reproduction, selfing and crossing techniques. Origin, evolution and 
domestication of crop plants, center of origin, law of homologous series, crop genetic resources- conservation 
and utilization. Application of principles of plant br eeding, improvement of crop plants. Molecular markers 
and their application in plant improvement. Pure-line selection, pedigree, mass and recurrent selections, 
combining ability, its significance in plant breeding. Heterosis and its exploitation. Somatic hybridization. 
Breeding for disease and pest resistance . Role of interspecific and intergeneric hybridization. Role of genetic 
engineering and biotechnology in crop improvement. Genetically modified crop plants.  
 
Seed production and processing technologies. Seed certification, seed testing and storage. DNA finger printing 
and seed registration. Role of public and private sectors in seed production and marketing. Intellectual Property 
Rights (IPR) issues, WTO issues and its impact on Agricu lture. Principles of Plant Physiology with reference 
to plant nutrition, absorption, translocation and metabolism of nutrients. Soil water-plant relationship.  
 
Enzymes and plant pigments; photosynthesis-modern concepts and factors affecting the process, aerobic and 
anaerobic respiration; C
3, C4 and CAM mechanisms.  Carbohydrate, protein and fat metabolism. Growth and 
development; photoperiodism and vernalilzation. Plant growth substances and their role in crop production. 
Physiology of seed development and germination; dormancy. Stress physiology – draught, salt and water 
stress.  
 
Major fruits, plantation crops, vegetables, spices and fl ower crops. Package practi ces of major horticultural 
crops. Protected cultivation and high tech horticulture. Post harvest technology and value addition of fruits and 
vegetables. Landscaping and commercial floriculture. Medicinal and aromatic plants. Role of fruits and 
vegetables in human nutrition.  
 
Diagnosis of pests and diseases of field crops, vegetables, orchard and plantation crops and their economic 
importance. Classification of pests and diseases and their management. Integrated pest and disease 
management. Storage pests and their management. Biological control of pests and diseases. Epidemiology and 
forecasting of major crop pests and diseases. Plant quarantine measures. Pesticides, their formulation and 
modes of action.  
 
Food production and consumption trends in India. Food security and growing population – vision 2020. 
Reasons for grain surplus. National and international food policies. Production, procurement, distribution 
constraints. Availability of food grains, per capita expenditure on food. Trends in poverty, Public Distribution 
System and Below Poverty Line population, Targeted Public Distribution System (PDS), policy 
implementation in context to globalization. Processing constraints. Relation of food production to National 
Dietary Guidelines and food consumption pattern. Food based dietary approaches to eliminate hunger. Nutrient 
deficiency – Micro nutrient 
deficiency : Protein Energy Malnutrition or Protein Calorie Malnutrition (PEM or PCM), Micro nutrient 
deficiency and HRD in context of work capacity of women and children. Food grain productivity and food 
security. 
 
ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND VETERINARY SCIENCE 
PAPER – I 
1. Animal Nutrition: 
1.1 Partitioning of food energy within the animal. Direct  and indirect calorimetry. Carbon – nitrogen balance 
and comparative slaughter methods. Systems for expressing energy value of foods in ruminants, pigs and 
poultry. Energy requirements for maintenance, growth, pregnancy, lactation, egg, wool, and meat production. 
 
1.2 Latest advances in protein nutrition. Energy protein interrelationships. Evaluation of protein quality. Use of 
NPN compounds in ruminant diets. Protein requirements for maintenance, growth, pregnancy, lactation, egg, 
wool and meat production. 
 
1.3 Major and trace minerals – Their sources, physio logical functions and defi ciency symptoms. Toxic 
minerals. Mineral interactions. Role of fat-soluble and water – soluble vitamins in the body, their sources and 
deficiency symptoms. 
 
1.4 Feed additives – methane inhibitors, probiotics,  enzymes, antibiotics, hormones, oligosaccharides, 
antioxidants, emulsifiers, mould inhibitors, buffers etc. Use and abuse of growth promoters like hormones and 
antibiotics – latest concepts.  
 
1.5 Conservation of fodders. Storage of feeds and feed ingredients. Recent advances in feed technology and 
feed processing. Anti – nutritional and toxic factors pr esent in livestock feeds. Feed analysis and quality 
control. Digestibility trials – direct, indirect and indicator methods. Predicting feed intake in grazing animals. 
 
1.6 Advances in ruminant nutrition. Nutrient requirements. Balanced rations. Feeding of calves, pregnant, work 
animals and breeding bulls. Strategies for feeding milch animals during diff erent stages of lactation cycle. 
Effect of feeding on milk composition. Feeding of goats for meat and milk production. Feeding of sheep for 
meat and wool production.  
 
1.7 Swine Nutrition. Nutrient requirements. Creep, starter, grower and finisher rations. Feeding of pigs for lean 
meat production. Low cost rations for swine. 
 
--- PAGE 6 ---
1.8 Poultry nutrition. Special features of poultry nutrition. Nutrient requirements for meat and egg production. 
Formulation of rations for different classes of layers and broilers. 
 
2. Animal Physiology: 
2.1 Physiology of blood and its circulation, respiration; excretion. Endocrine glands in health and disease. 
2.2 Blood constituents - Properties and functions-blood cell formation-Haemoglobin synthesis and chemistry-
plasma proteins production, classification and properties, coagulation of blood; Haemorrhagic disorders-
anticoagulants-blood groups-Blood volume-Plasma expanders-Buffer systems in blood. Biochemical tests and 
their significance in disease diagnosis. 
 
2.3 Circulation - Physiology of hear t, cardiac cycle, heart sounds, heart beat, electrocardiograms. Work and 
efficiency of heart-effect of ions on heart function-metabolism of cardiac muscle, nervous and chemical 
regulation of heart, effect of temperature and stress on heart, blood pressure and hypertension, osmotic 
regulation, arterial pulse, vasomotor regulation of circulation, shock. Coronary and pulmonary circulation, 
Blood-Brain barrier- Cerebrospinal fluid- circulation in birds. 
 
2.4 Respiration - Mechanism of respiration, Transport and exchange of gases – neural control of respiration-
chemo-receptors-hypoxia-respiration in birds. 
 
2.5 Excretion-Structure and function of kidney-formation of urine-methods of studying renal function-renal 
regulation of acidbase balance: physiological constituents of urine-renal failure-passive venous congestion-
Urinary secretion in chicken-Sweat glands and their function. Bio-chemical test for urinary dysfunction. 
 
2.6 Endocrine glands - Functional disorders their symptoms and diagnosis. Synthesis of hormones, mechanism 
and control of secretion- hormonal receptors-classification and function.  
 
2.7 Growth and Animal Production- Prenatal and postnatal growth, maturation, growth curves, measures of 
growth, factors affecting growth, conformation, body composition, meat quality.  
 
2.8 Physiology of Milk Production, Reproduction and Digestion- Current status of hormonal control of 
mammary development, milk secretion and milk ejection, Male and Female reproductive organs, their 
components and functions. Digestive organs and their functions. 
 
2.9 Environmental Physiology- Physiological relations  and their regulation; m echanisms of adaptation, 
environmental factors and regulatory mechanisms involved in animal behaviour, climatology – various 
parameters and their importance. Animal ecology. Physiology of behaviour. Effect of stress on health and 
production. 
 
3. Animal Reproduction : 
Semen quality- Preservation and Artific ial Insemination- Components of semen, composition of spermatozoa, 
chemical and physical properties of ej aculated semen, factors affecting se men in vivo and in vitro. Factors 
affecting semen production and quality, preservation, com position of diluents, sperm concentration, transport 
of 
diluted semen. Deep freezing techniques  in cows, sheep, goats, swine and poultry. Detection of oestrus and 
time of insemination for better conception. Anoestrus and repeat breeding. 
 
4. Livestock Production and Management : 
4.1 Commercial Dairy Farming- Comparison of dairy farming in India with advanced countries. Dairying 
under mixed farming and as specialized farming, economic dairy farming. Starting of a dairy farm, Capital and 
land requirement, organization of the dairy farm. Opportunities in dairy farming, factors determining the 
efficiency of dairy animal. Herd recording, budgeting, cost of milk production, pricing policy; Personnel 
Management. Developing Prac tical and Economic rations for dairy ca ttle; supply of greens throughout the 
year, feed and fodder requirements of Dairy Farm. Feeding regimes for young stock and bulls, heifers and 
breeding animals; new trends in feeding young and adult stock; Feeding records. 
 
4.2 Commercial meat, egg and wool production-Development of practical and economic rations for sheep, 
goats, pigs, rabbits and poultry. Supply of greens, fodder, feeding regimes for young and mature stock. New 
trends in enhancing production and management. Capital and land requirements and socio-economic concept. 
 
4.3 Feeding and management of animals under drought, flood and other natural calamities. 
 
5. Genetics and Animal Breeding: 
History of animal genetics. Mitosis and Meiosis: Mendelian inheritance; deviations to Mendelian genetics; 
Expression of genes; Linkage and crossing over; Sex dete rmination, sex influenced and sex limited characters; 
Blood groups and polymorphism; Chromosome aberrations ; Cytoplasmic inheritance. Gene and its structure; 
DNA as a genetic material; Genetic code and protein synthesis; Recombinant DNA technology. Mutations, 
types of mutations, methods for detecting mutations and mutation rate. Trans-genesis.  
 
5.1 Population Genetics applied to Animal Breeding- Quantitative Vs. qualitative traits; Hardy Weinberg Law; 
Population Vs. individual; Gene and genotypic frequency; Forces changing gene frequency; Random drift and 
small populations; Theory of path coefficient; Inbreeding, methods of estimating inbreeding coefficient, 
systems of inbreeding, Effective population size; Breeding value, estimation of breeding value, dominance and 
epistatic deviation; Partitioning of variation; Genotype X environment correlation and genotype X environment 
interaction; role of multiple measurements; Resemblance between relatives.  
 
5.2 Breeding Systems- Breeds of live- stock and Poultry. Heritability, repeatability and genetic and phenotypic 
correlations, their methods of estimation and precision of estimates; Aids to selection and their relative merits; 
Individual, pedigree, family and within family selection; Progeny testing; Methods of selection; Construction 
--- PAGE 7 ---
of selection indices and their uses; Comparative evaluation of genetic gains through various selection methods; 
Indirect selection and correlated response; Inbreeding, out breeding, upgrading, cross-breeding and synthesis of 
breeds; Crossing of inbred lines for commercial production; Selection for general and specific combining 
ability; Breeding for threshold characters. Sire index. 
 
6. Extension : 
Basic philosophy, objectives, concept and principles of extension. Different Methods adopted to educate 
farmers under rural conditions. Generation of technology, its transfer and feedback. Problems and constraints 
in transfer of technology. Animal husbandry programmes for rural development.  
 
PAPER – II 
1. Anatomy, Pharmacology and Hygiene : 
1.1 Histology and Histological Techniques: Paraffin embedding technique of tissue processing and H.E. 
staining – Freezing microtomy- Microscopy-Bright field microscope and electron microscope. Cytology-
structure of cell, organells and inclusions; cell division-cell types- Tissues and their classification-embryonic 
and adult tissuesComparative histology of organs-Vascular. Nervous, digestive, respiratory, musculo- skeletal 
and urogenital systemsEndocrine glands -Integuments-sense organs. 
 
1.2 Embryology – Embryology of vertebrates with special reference to aves and domestic mammals 
gametogenesis-fertilization-germ laye rs- foetal membranes and placentati on-types of placenta in domestic 
mammals-Teratology-twins and twinning-organogenesis -germ layer derivatives- endodermal, mesodermal and 
ectodermal derivates. 
 
1.3 Bovine Anatomy- Regional Anat omy: Para-nasal sinuses of OX- surface anatomy of salivary glands. 
Regional anatomy of infraorbital, maxillary, mandibuloalveolar, mental and cornual nerve block. Regional 
anatomy of paravertebral nerves, pudendal nerve, median ulnar and radial nerves-tibial,fibular and digital 
nerves-Cranial nerves-structures involved in epidural anaesthesia-superfi cial lymph nodes-surface anatomy of 
visceral organs of thoracic, abdominal and pelvic ca vities-comparative features of locomotor apparatus and 
their 
application in the biomechanics of mammalian body. 
 
1.4 Anatomy of Fowl- Musculo-skeletal system-functional anatomy in relation to respiration and flying, 
digestion and egg production. 
 
1.5 Pharmacology and therapeutic drugs Cellular level of pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics. Drugs 
acting on fluids and electrolyte balance. Drugs acting on Autonomic nervous system. Modern concepts of 
anaesthesia and dissociative anaesthetics. Autacoids. Antimicrobials and principles of chemotherapy in 
microbial infections. Use of hormones in therapeutic s-chemotherapy of parasitic infections. Drug and 
economic concerns in the Edible tissu es of animals-chemotherapy of Neoplastic diseases. Toxicity due to 
insecticides, plants, metals, non-metals, zootoxins and mycotoxins. 
 
1.6 Veterinary Hygiene with reference to water, air an d habitation - Assessment of pollution of water, air and 
soil-Importance of climate in animal  health- effect of environment on  animal function and performance-
relationship between industrialization and animal ag riculture- animal housing requirements for specific 
categories of domestic animals viz. pr egnant cows and sows, milking cows, broiler birds- stress, strain and 
productivity in relation to animal habitation. 
 
2. Animal Diseases : 
2.1 Etiology, epidemiology pathogenesis, symptoms, postmortem lesions, diagnosis, and control of infectious 
diseases of cattle, sheep and goat, horses, pigs and poultry. 
 
2.2 Etiology, epidemiology, symptoms, diagnosis, treat ment of production diseases of cattle, horse, pig and 
poultry.  
 
2.3 Deficiency diseases of domestic animals and birds. 
2.4 Diagnosis and treatment of non-specific conditions  like impaction, Bloat, Diarrhoea, Indigestion, 
dehydration, stroke, poisoning. 
 
2.5 Diagnosis and treatment of neurological disorders. 
2.6 Principles and methods of immunization of animals against specific diseasesherd immunity- disease free 
zones- ‘zero’ disease concept- chemoprophylaxis. 
 
2.7 Anaesthesia- local, regional and general-preanesthetic  medication. Symptoms and surgical interference in 
fractures and dislocation. Hernia , choking abomasal displacement-  Caesarian operations. Rumenotomy-
Castrations. 
 
2.8 Disease investigation techniques.Materials for labora tory investigation- Establishment of Animal Health 
Centers- Disease free zone.  
 
3. Veterinary Public Health: 
3.1 Zoonoses. - Classification, definition, role of animals and birds in prevalence and transmission of zoonotic 
diseases- occupational zoonotic diseases. 
 
3.2 Epidemiology- Principle, definition of epidemiological terms, application of epidemiological measures in 
the study of diseases and disease control. Epidemiological features of air, water and food borne infections. OIE 
regulations, WTO, sanitary and phytosanitary measures. 
 
--- PAGE 8 ---
3.3 Veterinary Jurisprudence- Rules and Regulations for improvement of animal quality and prevention of 
animal diseases - State and central rules for prevention of animal and animal product borne diseases-S P C A- 
Veterolegal cases- Certificates Materials and Methods of collection of samples for veterolegal investigation. 
 
4. Milk and Milk Products Technology: 
4.1 Market Milk: Quality, testing and grading of raw milk. Processing, packaging, storing, distribution, 
marketing, defects and their control. Preparation of the following milks: Pasteurized, standardized, toned, 
double toned, sterilized, homogenized, reconstituted, reco mbined and flavoured milks. Preparation of cultured 
milks, cultures and their management, yoghurt, Dahi, Lassi and Srikhand. Preparation of flavoured and 
sterilized milks. Legal standards.  Sanitation requireme nt for clean and safe milk and for the milk plant 
equipment. 
 
4.2 Milk Products Technology: Selection of raw materials, processing, storing , distributing and marketing 
milk products such as Cream, Butter,  Ghee, Khoa, Channa, Cheese, conden sed, evaporated, dried milk and 
baby food, Ice cream and Kulfi; by-products, whey products, butter milk, lactose and casein. Testing, grading, 
judging milk products- BIS and Agmark specifications, legal standards, quality control and nutritive properties. 
Packaging, processing and operational control. Costing of dairy products. 
 
5. Meat Hygiene and Technology: 
5.1 Meat Hygiene. 
5.1.1 Ante mortem care and management of food animals, stunning, slaughter and dressing operations; abattoir 
requirements and designs; Meat inspection procedures  and judgment of carcass meat cuts- grading of carcass 
meat cuts- duties and functions of Veterinarians in wholesome meat production. 
 
5.1.2 Hygienic methods of handling production of meat- Spoilage of meat and control measures- Post - 
slaughter physicochemical changes in meat and factors that influence them- Quality improvement methods – 
Adulteration of meat and detection Regulatory provisions in Meat trade and Industry. 
 
5.2 Meat Technology. 
5.2.1 Physical and chemical characteristics of meat- Meat emulsions- Methods of preservation of meat- Curing, 
canning, irradiation, packaging of meat and meat products, processing and formulations. 
 
5.3 By- products- Slaughter house by- products and their utilization- Edible and inedible by products- Social 
and economic implications of proper utilization of sl aughter house by-products- Organ products for food and 
pharmaceuticals. 
 
5.4 Poultry Products Technology- Chemical composition and nutritive value of poultry meat, pre - slaughter 
care and management. Slaughtering techniques, inspection, preservation of poultry meat and products. Legal 
and BIS standards. 
 
Structure, composition and nutritive value of eggs. Microbial spoilage. Preservation and maintenance. 
Marketing of poultry meat, eggs and products. Value added meat products. 
 
5.5 Rabbit/Fur Animal farming – Rabbit meat production. Disposal and utilization of fur and wool and 
recycling of waste by products. Grading of wool.  
 
ANTHROPOLOGY 
PAPER - I 
1.1 Meaning, scope and development of Anthropology. 
1.2 Relationships with other disciplines: Social Sciences, Behavioural Sciences, Life Sciences, Medical 
Sciences, Earth Sciences and Humanities.  
 
1.3 Main branches of Anthropology, their scope and relevance: 
(a) Social- cultural Anthropology. 
(b) Biological Anthropology. 
(c) Archaeological Anthropology. 
(d) Linguistic Anthropology. 
1.4 Human Evolution and emergence of Man: 
(a) Biological and Cultural factors in human evolution. 
(b) Theories of Organic Evolution (PreDarwinian, Darwinian and Post-Darwinian). 
(c) Synthetic theory of evolution; Brief outline of terms and concepts of evolutionary biology (Doll’s rule, 
Cope’s rule, Gause’s rule, parallelism, convergence, adaptive radiation, and mosaic evolution). 
 
1.5 Characteristics of Primates; Evolutionary Trend and Primate Taxonomy; Primate Adaptations; (Arboreal 
and Terrestrial) Primate Taxonomy; Primate Behaviour; Tertiary and Quaternary fossil primates; Living Major 
Primates; Comparative Anatomy of Man and Apes; Skeletal changes due to erect posture and its implications. 
 
1.6 Phylogenetic status, characteristics and geographical distribution of the following: 
(a) Plio-pleistocene hominids in South and East Africa - Australopithecines. 
(b) Homo erectus: Africa (Paranthropus), Europe (Homo erectus heidelbergensis), Asia (Homo erectus 
javanicus, Homo erectus pekinensis). 
 
--- PAGE 9 ---
(c) Neanderthal Man- La-Chapelle-auxsaints (Classical type), Mt. Carmel (Progressive type). 
(d) Rhodesian man. 
(e) Homo sapiens — Cromagnon,  Grimaldi and Chancelede. 
1.7 The biological basis of life: The Cell, DNA structure and replication, Protein Synthesis, Gene, Mutation, 
Chromosomes, and Cell Division. 
 
1.8 (a) Principles of Prehistoric Archaeology. Chronology: Relative and Absolute Dating methods. 
      (b) Cultural Evolution- Broad Outlines of Prehistoric cultures: 
(i) Paleolithic 
(ii) Mesolithic 
(iii) Neolithic 
(iv) Chalcolithic 
(v) Copper-Bronze Age 
(vi) Iron Age 
2.1 The Nature of Culture :  The concept and characteristics of cultu re and civilization; Ethnocentrism vis-à-
vis cultural Relativism. 
 
2.2 The Nature of Society:  Concept of Society; Society and Culture; Social Institutions; Social groups; and 
Social stratification.  
 
2.3 Marriage: Definition and universality; Laws of marriag e (endogamy, exogamy, hypergamy, hypogamy, 
incest taboo); Types of marriage (monogamy, polygamy, polyandry, group marriage). Functions of marriage; 
Marriage regulations (preferential, prescriptive and proscriptive); Marriage payments (bride wealth and 
dowry). 
 
2.4 Family: Definition and universality; Family, household and domestic groups; functions of family; Types of 
family (from the perspectives of stru cture, blood relation, marriage, re sidence and succession); Impact of 
urbanization, industrialization and feminist movements on family.  
 
2.5 Kinship:  Consanguinity and Affinity; Principles and types of descent (Unilineal, Double, Bilateral, 
Ambilineal); Forms of descent groups  (lineage, clan, phratry, moiety  and kindred); Kinship terminology 
(descriptive and classificatory); Descent, Filiation and Complimentary Filiation; Descent and Alliance. 
 
3. Economic organization:  Meaning, scope and relevance of economic anthropology; Formalist and 
Substantivist debate; Principles governing production, distribution and exchange (reciprocity, redistribution 
and market), in communities, subsisting on hunting an d gathering, fishing, swiddening, pastoralism, 
horticulture, and 
agriculture; globalization and indigenous economic systems. 
 
4. Political organization and Social Control: Band, tribe, chiefdom, kingdom and state; concepts of power, 
authority and legitimacy; social control, law and justice in simple societies. 
 
 
5. Religion: Anthropological approaches to the study of religion (evolutionary, psychological and functional); 
monotheism and polytheism; sacred and profane; myths and rituals; forms of religion in tribal and peasant 
societies (animism, animatism, fetishism, naturism and totemism); religion, magic and science distinguished; 
magicoreligious functionaries (priest, shaman, medicine man, sorcerer and witch). 
 
6. Anthropological theories: 
(a) Classical evolutionism (Tylor, Morgan and Frazer) 
(b) Historical particularism (Boas); Diffusionism (British, German and American) 
(c) Functionalism (Malinowski); Structural-functionlism (Radcliffe-Brown) 
(d) Structuralism (L’evi - Strauss and E.Leach) 
(e) Culture and personality (Benedict, Mead, Linton, Kardiner and Cora – du Bois). 
(f) Neo - evolutionism (Childe, White, Steward, Sahlins and Service) 
(g) Cultural materialism (Harris)  
(h) Symbolic and interpretive theories (Turner, Schneider and Geertz) 
(i) Cognitive theories (Tyler, Conklin) 
(j) Post- modernism in anthropology 
7. Culture, language and communication: Nature, origin and characteristics of language; verbal and non-
verbal communication; social context of language use. 
 
8. Research methods in anthropology: 
(a) Fieldwork tradition in anthropology 
(b) Distinction between technique, method and methodology 
(c) Tools of data collection: observation, interview, schedules, questionnaire, Case study, genealogy, life-
history, oral history, secondary sources of information, participatory methods. 
 
--- PAGE 10 ---
(d) Analysis, interpretation and presentation of data. 
9.1 Human Genetics : Methods and Application: Methods for study of genetic principles in man-family study 
(pedigree analysis, twin study, foster child, co-twin method, cytogenetic method, chromosomal and karyo-type 
analysis), biochemical methods, immunological methods, D.N.A. technology and recombinant technologies. 
 
9.2 Mendelian genetics in man-family study, single factor, multifactor, lethal, sublethal and polygenic 
inheritance in man. 
 
9.3 Concept of genetic polymorphism and selection, Mendelian population, HardyWeinberg law; causes and 
changes which bring down frequency – mutation, isolation,  migration, selection, inbreeding and genetic drift. 
Consanguineous and non-consanguineous mating, genetic load, genetic effect of consanguineous and cousin 
marriages. 
 
9.4 Chromosomes and chromosomal aberrations in man, methodology. 
(a) Numerical and structural aberrations (disorders). 
(b) Sex chromosomal aberrations – Klinefelter (XXY), Turner (XO), Super female (XXX), intersex and other 
syndromic disorders. 
 
(c) Autosomal aberrations – Down syndrome, Patau, Edward and Cri-du-chat syndromes. 
(d) Genetic imprints in human disease, genetic scre ening, genetic counseling, human DNA profiling, gene 
mapping and genome study. 
 
9.5 Race and racism, biological basis of morphological variation of non- metric and metric characters. Racial 
criteria, racial traits in relation to heredity and envi ronment; biological basis of r acial classification, racial 
differentiation and race crossing in man. 
 
9.6 Age, sex and population variation as genetic marker- ABO, Rh blood groups, HLA Hp, transferring, Gm, 
blood enzymes. Physiological characteristics-Hb level, body fat, pulse rate, respiratory functions and sensory 
perceptions in different cultural and socio-economic groups. 
 
9.7 Concepts and methods of Ecological Anthropology. Bio-cultural Adaptations – Genetic and Non- genetic 
factors. Man’s physiological responses to environmental stresses: hot desert, cold, high altitude climate. 
 
9.8 Epidemiological Anthropology: Health and disease. Infectious and non-infectious diseases. Nutritional 
deficiency related diseases.  
 
10. Concept of human growth and development: stages of growth - pre-natal, natal, infant, childhood, 
adolescence, maturity, senescence. 
 
- Factors affecting growth and development genetic, environmental, biochemical, nutritional, cultural and 
socio-economic. 
 
- Ageing and senescence. Theories and observations - biological and chronological longevity. Human physique 
and somatotypes. Methodologies for growth studies. 
 
11.1 Relevance of menarche, menopause and other bioevents to fertility. Fertility patterns and differentials. 
11.2 Demographic theories- biological, social and cultural. 
11.3 Biological and socio-ecological factors influencing fecundity, fertility, natality and mortality. 
12. Applications of Anthropology: Anthropology of sports, Nutritional anthropology, Anthropology in 
designing of defence and other equipments, Forensic Anthropology, Methods and principles of personal 
identification and reconstruction, Applied human genetics – Paternity diagnosis, genetic counseling and 
eugenics, DNA technology in diseases and medicine, serogenetics and cytogenetics in reproductive biology. 
 
 
PAPER – II 
1.1 Evolution of the Indian Culture and Civilization — Prehistoric (Palaeolithic, Mesolithic, Neolithic and 
Neolithic Chalcolithic). Protohistoric (Indus Civiliza tion): Pre- Harappan, Harappan and postHarappan 
cultures. Contributions of tribal cultures to Indian civilization. 
 
1.2 Palaeo – anthropological eviden ces from India with special refere nce to Siwaliks and Narmada basin 
(Ramapithecus, Sivapithecus and Narmada Man).  
 
1.3 Ethno-archaeology in India : The concept of ethno-archaeology; Survivals and Parallels among the hunting, 
foraging, fishing, pastoral and peasant communities including arts and crafts producing communities.  
 
2. Demographic profile of India — Ethnic and linguistic elements in the Indian population and their 
distribution. Indian population – factors influencing its structure and growth.  
 
3.1 The structure and nature of traditional Indian social  system — Varnashram, Purushartha, Karma, Rina and 
Rebirth.  
 
3.2 Caste system in India- structure and characteristics, Varna and caste, Th eories of origin of caste system, 
Dominant caste, Caste mobility, Future of caste system, Jajmani system, Tribe- caste continuum.  
 
3.3 Sacred Complex and Nature- Man-Spirit Complex. 
3.4 Impact of Buddhism, Jainism, Islam and Christianity on Indian society. 
--- PAGE 11 ---
4. Emergence and growth of anthropology in India-Contributions of the 18th, 19th and early 20th Century 
scholar-administrators. Contributions of Indian anthropologists to tribal and caste studies. 
 
5.1 Indian Village: Significance of village study in Indi a; Indian village as a social system; Traditional and 
changing patterns of settlement and inter-caste relations; Agrarian relations in Indian villages; Impact of 
globalization on Indian villages.  
 
5.2 Linguistic and religious minorities and their social, political and economic status.  
5.3 Indigenous and exogenous processes of socio-cultural change in Indian society: Sanskritization, 
Westernization, Modernization; Inter-play of little an d great traditions; Panchayati raj and social change; 
Media and social change. 
 
6.1 Tribal situation in India – Bio-ge netic variability, linguistic and socio- economic characteristics of tribal 
populations and their distribution. 
 
6.2 Problems of the tribal Communities — land alie nation, poverty, indebtedness, low literacy, poor 
educational facilities, unemployment, underemployment, health and nutrition. 
 
6.3 Developmental projects and their impact on trib al displacement and problems of rehabilitation. 
Development of forest policy and tribals. Impact of urbanization and industrialization on tribal populations. 
 
7.1 Problems of exploitation and deprivation of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward 
Classes. Constitutional safeguards for Scheduled Tribes and Scheduled Castes. 
 
7.2 Social change and contemporary tribal societies: Impact of modern democratic institutions, development 
programmes and welfare measures on tribals and weaker sections. 
 
7.3 The concept of ethnicity; Ethnic conflicts and politi cal developments; Unrest among tribal communities; 
Regionalism and demand for autonomy; Pseudo-tribalism; Social change among the tribes during colonial and 
post-Independent India.  
 
8.1 Impact of Hinduism, Buddhism, Christianity, Islam and other religions on tribal societies. 
8.2 Tribe and nation state — a comparative study of tribal communities in India and other countries. 
9.1 History of administration of tribal areas, tribal policies, plans, programmes of tribal development and their 
implementation. The concept of PTGs (Primitive Tribal Groups), their distribution, special programmes for 
their development. Role of N.G.O.s in tribal development. 
 
9.2 Role of anthropology in tribal and rural development. 
9.3 Contributions of anthropology to the understanding  of regionalism, communalism, and ethnic and political 
movements. 
 
BOTANY 
PAPER – I 
1. Microbiology and Plant Pathology: 
Structure and reproduction/multiplication of viruses, viro ids, bacteria, fungi and mycoplasma; Applications of 
microbiology in agriculture, industry, medicine and in control of soil and water pollution; Prion and Prion 
hypothesis.  
 
Important crop diseases caused by viruses, bacteria, mycoplasma, fungi and nematodes; Modes of infection 
and dissemination; Molecular basis of infection and dis ease resistance/defence; Physiology of parasitism and 
control measures; Fungal toxins; Modelling and disease forecasting; Plant quarantine. 
 
2. Cryptogams: 
  
Algae, fungi, lichens, bryophytes, pteridophytes - structure and reproduction from evolutionary viewpoint; 
Distribution of Cryptogams in India and their ecological and economic importance.  
 
3. Phanerogams: 
Gymnosperms: Concept of Progymnosperms; Classification and distribution of gymnosperms; Salient features 
of Cycadales, Ginkgoales, Coniferales and Gnetales, th eir structure and reproduction; General account of 
Cycadofilicales, Bennettitales and Cordaitales; Geologic al time scale; Type of fossils and their study 
techniques.  Angiosperms: Systematics, anatomy, embryology, palynology and phylogeny. 
 
Taxonomic hierarchy; In ternational Code of Botanical Nomenclature; Numerical taxonomy and 
chemotaxonomy; Evidence from anatomy, embryology and palynology.  Origin and evolution of angiosperms; 
Comparative account of various systems of classification of angiosperms; Study of angiospe rmic families – 
Mangnoliaceae, Ranuncu laceae, Brassicaceae, Rosaceae, Fa baceae, Euphorbiaceae, Malvaceae, 
Dipterocarpaceae, Apiaceae, Asclepiadaceae, Verbenaceae, Solanaceae, Rubiaceae, Cucurbitaceae, Asteraceae, 
Poaceae, Arecaceae, Liliaceae, Musaceae and Orchidaceae.  
  
Stomata and their types; Glandular and non-glandular trichomes; Unusual secondary growth; Anatomy of C3 
and C4 plants; Xylem and phloem differentiation; Wood anatomy.  
 
Development of male and female gametophytes, pollina tion, fertilization; Endosperm - its development and 
function; Patterns of embryo development; Polyembroyony and apomixes; Applications of palynology; 
Experimental embryology including pollen storage and test-tube fertilization.  
 
--- PAGE 12 ---
4. Plant Resource Development: 
Domestication and introduction of plants; Origin of cultiv ated plants; Vavilov’s centres of origin; Plants as 
sources for food, fodder, fibre, spices , beverages, edible oils, drugs, narcotics, insecticides, timber, gums, 
resins and dyes, latex, cellulose, starch and its products; Perfumery; Importance of Ethnobotany in Indian 
context; Energy plantations; Botanical Gardens and Herbaria.  
 
5. Morphogenesis: 
Totipotency, polarity, symmetry and dfferentiation; Cell,  tissue, organ and protoplast culture; Somatic hybrids  
and Cybrids; Micropropagation; Somaclonal variation and its applications; Pollen haploids, embryo rescue 
methods and their applications.  
 
PAPER – II 
1. Cell Biology: 
Techniques of cell biology; Prokaryotic and eukaryotic ce lls - structural and ultra-structural details; Structure 
and function of extra-cellular matrix  (cell wall), membranes-cell adhesion, membrane transport and vesicular 
transport; Structure and function of cell organelles (chloroplasts, mitochondria, ER, dictyo-somes ribosomes, 
endosomes, lysosomes, peroxisomes); Cytoskelaton and microtubules; Nucleus, nucleolus, nuclear pore 
complex; Chromatin and nucleosome;  Cell signalling and cell receptors; Signal transduction; Mitosis and 
meiosis; Molecular basis of cell cy cle; Numerical and structural vari ations in chromosomes and their 
significance; Chromatin organization and packaging of genome; Polytene chromosomes; B-chromosomes – 
structure, behaviour and significance. 
 
2. Genetics, Molecular Biology and Evolution: 
Development of genetics; Gene versus allele concep ts (Pseudoalleles); Quantitative genetics and multiple 
factors; Incomplete dominance, polygenic inheritance, multiple alleles; Linkage and crossing over; Methods of 
gene mapping, including molecular maps (idea of mapping function); Sex chromosomes and sex-linked 
inheritance, sex determination and molecular basis of sex differentiation; Mutations (biochemical and 
molecular basis); Cytoplasmic inheritance and cytoplasmic genes (including genetics of male sterility). 
 
Structure and synthesis of nucleic acids and proteins; Genetic code and regulation of gene expression; Gene 
silencing; Multigene families; Organic evolution – evidences, mechanism and theories. 
 
Role of RNA in origin and evolution. 
3. Plant Breeding, Biotechnology and Biostatistics: 
Methods of plant breeding – introduction, selection and hybridization (pedigree, backcross, mass selection, 
bulk method); Mutation, polyploidy, male  sterility and heterosis breeding; Us e of apomixes in plant breeding; 
DNA sequencing; Genetic engineering – methods of transfer of genes; Transgenic crops and biosafety aspects; 
Development and use of molecular markers in plant breeding; Tools and techniques - probe, southern blotting, 
DNA fingerprinting, PCR and FISH.  
 
Standard deviation and coefficient of variation (CV); Tests of significance (Z-test, t-test and chi-square test); 
Probability and distributions (normal, binomial and Poisson); Correlation and regression. 
 
4. Physiology and Biochemistry: 
Water relations, mineral nutrition and ion transport, mineral deficiencies; Photosynthesis – photochemical 
reactions; photo-phosphorylation and carbon fixation pathways; C3, C4 and CAM pathways; Mechanism of 
phloem transport; Respiration (anerobic and aerobic, including fermentation) – electron transport chain and 
oxidative phosphorylation; Photorespiration; Chemiosmotic theory and ATP synthesis; Lipid metabolism; 
Nitrogen fixation and nitrogen metabolism; Enzymes, coenzymes; Energy transfer and energy conservation; 
Importance of secondary metabolites; Pigments as photoreceptors (plastidial pigments and phytochrome); Plant 
movements; Photoperiodism and flowering, vernalization, senescence; Growth substances – their chemical 
nature, role and applications in agri-horticulture; Growth indices, growth movements; Stress physiology (heat, 
water, salinity, metal); Fruit and seed physiology; Dormancy, storage and germination of seed; Fruit ripening – 
its molecular basis and manipulation. 
 
5. Ecology and Plant Geography: 
Concept of ecosystem; Ecological factors; Concepts and dynamics of community; Plant succession; Concept of 
biosphere; Ecosystems; Conservation; Pollution and its control (including phytoremediation); Plant indicators; 
Environment (Protection) Act.  
 
Forest types of India - Ecological and economic importance of forests, afforestation, deforestation and social 
forestry; Endangered plants, endemism, IUCN categories, Red Data Books; Biodiversity and its conservation; 
Protected Area Network; Convention on Biological Diversity; Farmers’ Rights and Intellectual Property 
Rights; Concept of Sustainable Development; Biogeochemical cycles; Global warming and climatic change; 
Invasive species; Environmental Impact Assessment; Phytogeo-graphical regions of India.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
--- PAGE 13 ---
CHEMISTRY 
PAPER – I 
1. Atomic Structure: 
Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle, Schrodinger wave equation (time independent); Interpretation of wave 
function, particle in one-dimensional box, quantum numbers, hydrogen atom wave functions; Shapes of s, p 
and d orbitals.  
 
2. Chemical Bonding: 
Ionic bond, characteristics of ionic compounds, lattice energy, Born-Haber cycle; covalent bond and its general 
characteristics, polarities of bonds in molecules and their dipole moments; Valence bond theory, concept of 
resonance and resonance energy; Molecular orbital theory (LCAO method); bonding in H
2+, H2, He2+ to Ne2, 
NO, CO, HF, and CN–; Comparison of valence bond and molecular orbital theories, bond order, bond strength 
and bond length. 
 
3. Solid State: 
Crystal systems; Designation of crystal faces, lattice stru ctures and unit cell; Bragg’s law; X-ray diffraction by 
crystals; Close packing, radius ratio rules, calculation of some limiting radius ratio values; Structures of NaCl, 
ZnS, CsCl and CaF
2; Stoichiometric and nonstoichiometric defects, impurity defects, semi-conductors. 
 
4. The Gaseous State and Transport Phenomenon: 
Equation of state for real gases, inter-molecular interactions and critical phenomena and liquefaction of gases, 
Maxwell’s distribution of speeds, intermolecular co llisions, collisions on the wall and effusion; Thermal 
conductivity and viscosity of ideal gases. 
 
5. Liquid State: 
Kelvin equation; Surface tension and surface energy, wetting and contact angle, interfacial tension and 
capillary action.  
 
6. Thermodynamics: 
Work, heat and internal energy; first law of thermodynamics.  
 
Second law of thermodynamics; entropy as a state function, entropy changes in various processes, entropy–
reversibility and irreversibility, Free energy functions; Thermodynamic equation of state; Maxwell relations; 
Temperature, volume and pressure dependence of U, H, A, G, C
p and C vá and â; J-T effect and inversion 
temperature; criteria for equilibrium, relation between equilibrium constant and thermodynamic quantities; 
Nernst heat theorem, introductory idea of third law of thermodynamics.  
 
7. Phase Equilibria and Solutions: 
Clausius-Clapeyron equation; phase diagram for a pure su bstance; phase equilibria in binary systems, partially 
miscible liquids–upper and lower critical solution temper atures; partial molar quantities, their significance and 
determination; excess thermodynamic functions and their determination. 
 
8. Electrochemistry: 
Debye-Huckel theory of strong electrolytes and De bye-Huckel limiting Law for various equilibrium and 
transport properties.  Galvanic cells, concentration cells; electrochemical series, measurement of e.m.f. of cells 
and its applications fuel cells and batteries. 
 
Processes at electrodes; double layer at the interface; ra te of charge transfer, cu rrent density; over-potential; 
electro-analytical techniques: Polarography, amperometry, ion selective electrodes and their uses. 
. 
9. Chemical Kinetics: 
Differential and integral rate equations for zeroth, firs t, second and fractional order reactions; Rate equations 
involving reverse, parallel, consecutive and chain reactions; branching chain and explosions; effect of 
temperature and pressure on rate constant; Study of fast reactions by stopflow and relaxation methods; 
Collisions and transition state theories. 
 
10. Photochemistry: 
Absorption of light; decay of excite d state by different rout es; photochemical reactions between hydrogen and 
halogens and their quantum yields.  
 
11. Surface Phenomena and Catalysis: 
Absorption from gases and solutions on solid adsorbents, Langmuir and B.E.T. adsorption isotherms; 
determination of surface area, characteristics and mechanism of reaction on heterogeneous catalysts. 
 
12. Bio-inorganic Chemistry:  
Metal ions in biological systems and their role in ion transport across the membranes (molecular mechanism), 
oxygen-uptake proteins, cytochromes and ferredoxins. 
 
13. Coordination Compounds: 
(i) Bonding theories of metal complexes; Valence bond theory, crystal field theory and its modifications; 
applications of theories in the explanation of magnetism and electronic spectra of metal complexes. 
 
--- PAGE 14 ---
(ii) Isomerism in coordination compounds; IUPAC nomenclature of coordination compounds; stereochemistry 
of complexes with 4 and 6 coordination numbers; chelate effect and polynuclear complexes; trans effect and its 
theories; kinetics of substitution reacti ons in square-planer complexes; th ermodynamic and kinetic stability of 
complexes.  
 
(iii) EAN rule, Synthesis structure and reactivity of metal carbonyls; carboxylate anions, carbonyl hydrides and 
metal nitrosyl compounds. 
 
(iv) Complexes with aromatic systems, synthesis, structure and bonding in metal olefin complexes, alkyne 
complexes and cyclopentadienyl complexes; coordinative unsaturation, oxidative addition reactions, insertion 
reactions, fluxional molecules and their characterization; Compounds with metal-metal bonds and metal atom 
clusters. 
 
14. Main Group Chemistry: 
Boranes, borazines, phosphazenes and cyclic phosphaze ne, silicates and silicones, Interhalogen compounds; 
Sulphur – nitrogen compounds, noble gas compounds.  
 
15. General Chemistry of ‘f’ Block Elements: 
Lanthanides and actinides; separation, oxidation stat es, magnetic and spectral properties; lanthanide 
contraction.  
 
PAPER - II 
1. Delocalised Covalent Bonding: 
Aromaticity, anti-aromaticity; annulenes, azulenes, tropolones, fulvenes, sydnones. 
2. (i) Reaction Mechanisms:  General methods (both kinetic and non-kinetic) of study of mechanism of 
organic reactions: isotopic method, cross-over experiment , intermediate trapping, stereochemistry; energy of 
activation; thermodynamic control and kinetic control of reactions.  
 
(ii) Reactive Intermediates: Generation, geometry, stability and reactions of carbonium ions and carbanions, 
free radicals, carbenes, benzynes and nitrenes. 
 
(iii) Substitution Reactions:  S
N1, S N2 and S Ni mechanisms; neighbouring group participation; electrophilic 
and nucleophilic reactions of aromatic compounds including heterocyclic compounds–pyrrole, furan, 
thiophene and indole. 
 
(iv) Elimination Reactions:  E1, E2 and E1cb mechanisms; orientation in E2 reactions–Saytzeff and 
Hoffmann; pyrolytic syn elimination – Chugaev and Cope eliminations. 
 
(v) Addition Reactions:  Electrophilic addition to C=C and C=C; nucleophilic addition to C=0, C=N, 
conjugated olefins and carbonyls. 
 
(vi) Reactions an d Rearrangements:  (a) Pinacol-pinacolone, Hoffmann, Beckmann, Baeyer–Villiger, 
Favorskii, Fries, Claisen, Cope, Stevens and Wagner-Meerwein rearrangements. 
 
(b) Aldol condensation, Claisen condensation, Dieck mann, Perkin, Knoevenagel, Witting, Clemmensen, 
Wolff-Kishner, Cannizzaro a nd von Richter reactions; Stobbe, benzoi n and acyloin condensations; Fischer 
indole synthesis, Skraup synthesis, Bischler-Napieralski, Sandmeyer, Reimer-Tiemann and Reformatsky 
reactions. 
 
3. Pericyclic Reactions: 
Classification and examples; Woodwa rd-Hoffmann rules – electrocyclic reactions, cycloaddition reactions 
[2+2 and 4+2] and sigmatropic shifts [1, 3; 3, 3 and 1, 5] FMO approach. 
 
4. (i) Preparation and Properties of Polymers: Organic polymers–polyethy-lene, polystyrene, polyvinyl 
chloride, teflon, nylon, terylene, synthetic and natural rubber.  
 
(ii) Biopolymers: Structure of proteins, DNA and RNA. 
 
5. Synthetic Uses of Reagents: 
OsO
4, HIO4, CrO3, Pb(OAc)4, SeO2, NBS, B2H6, Na-Liquid NH3, LiAlH4, NaBH4, n-BuLi and MCPBA. 
6. Photochemistry: 
Photochemical reactions of simple organic compounds, excited and ground states, singlet and triplet states, 
Norrish-Type I and Type II reactions. 
 
7. Spectroscopy: 
Principle and applications in structure elucidation:  
(i) Rotational: Diatomic molecules; isotopic substitution and rotational constants. 
(ii) Vibrational: Diatomic molecules, linear triatomic molecules,  specific frequencies of functional groups in 
polyatomic molecules.  
 
(iii) Electronic: Singlet and triplet states; n π* and π π* transitions; application to conjugated double bonds 
and conjugated carbonyls–Woodward-Fieser rules; Charge transfer spectra. 
 
(iv) Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (
1H NMR): Basic principle; chemical shift and spin-spin interaction and 
coupling constants. 
--- PAGE 15 ---
 
(v) Mass Spectrometry: Parent peak, base peak, metastable peak, McLafferty rearrangement. 
 
CIVIL ENGINEERING 
PAPER – I 
1. Engineering Mechanics, Strength of Materials and Structural Analysis: 
1.1 Engineering Mechanics: 
Units and Dimensions, SI Units, Vectors, Concept of Force, Concept of particle and rigid body. Concurrent, 
Non Concurrent and parallel forces in a plane, moment of force, free body diagram, conditions of equilibrium, 
Principle of virtual work, equivalent force system.  
 
First and Second Moment of area, Mass moment of Inertia. 
Static Friction. 
Kinematics and Kinetics: 
Kinematics in Cartesian Co-ordinates, motion under uniform and non-uniform acceleration, motion under 
gravity. Kinetics of particle: Momentum and Energy principles, collision of elastic bodies, rotation of rigid 
bodies. 
 
1.2 Strength of Materials: 
Simple Stress and Strain, Elastic constants, axially loaded compression members, Shear force and bending 
moment, theory of simple bending, Shear Stress distribution across cross sections, Beams of uniform strength. 
 
Deflection of beams: Macaulay’s me thod, Mohr’s Moment area method, Conjugate beam method, unit load 
method. Torsion of Shafts, Elastic stability of columns, Euler’s Rankine’s and Secant formulae.  
 
1.3 Structural Analysis: 
Castiglianio’s theorems I and II, unit load method of consistent deformation applied to beams and pin jointed 
trusses. Slopedeflection, moment distribution, Rolling loads and Influences lines: Influences lines for Shear 
Force and Bending moment at a section of beam. Criteria for maximum shear force and bending Moment in 
beams traversed by a system of moving loads. Influences lines for simply supported plane pin jointed trusses. 
 
Arches: Three hinged, two hinged and fixed arches, rib shortening and temperature effects. 
Matrix methods of analysis: Force method and displacement method of anal ysis of indeterminate beams and 
rigid frames. 
 
Plastic Analysis of beams and frames: Theory of plastic bending, plastic analysis, statical method, Mechanism 
method. 
 
Unsymmetrical bending: Moment of inertia, product of inertia, position of Neutral Axis and Principle axes, 
calculation of bending stresses. 
. 
2. Design of Structures: Steel, Concrete and Masonry Structures:  
2.1 Structural Steel Design: 
Structural Steel: Factors of safety and load factors. Riveted, bolted and welded joints and connections. Design 
of tension and compression member, beams of built up section, riveted and welded plate girders, gantry 
girders, stancheons with battens and lacings.  
. 
2.2 Design of Concrete and Masonry Structures: 
Concept of mix design. Reinforced Concrete: Working Stress and Limit State method of design–
Recommendations of I.S. codes Design of one way and two way slabs, stair-case slabs, simple and continuous 
beams of rectangular, T and L sections. Compression memb ers under direct load with  or without eccentricity, 
Cantilever and Counter fort type retaining walls. Wa ter tanks: Design requirements for Rectangular and 
circular tanks resting on ground. 
 
Prestressed concrete: Methods and systems of prestressing, anchorages, Analysis and design of sections for 
flexure based on working stress, loss of prestress.  
 
Design of brick masonry as per I.S. Codes  
3. Fluid Mechanics, Open Channel Flow and Hydraulic Machines: 
3.1 Fluid Mechanics:  
Fluid properties and their role in fluid motion, fluid statics including forces acting on plane and curved 
surfaces. 
Kinematics and Dynamics of Fluid flow: Velocity a nd accelerations, stream lines, equation of continuity, 
irrotational and rotational flow, velocity potential and stream functions. 
 
Continuity, momentum and energy equation, Navier-St okes equation, Euler’s equation of motion, application 
to fluid flow problems, pipe flow, sluice gates, weirs.  
 
3.2 Dimensional Analysis and Similitude: 
Buckingham’s Pi-theorem, dimensionless parameters.  
3.3 Laminar Flow: 
--- PAGE 16 ---
Laminar flow between parallel, stationary and moving plates, flow through tube. 
3.4 Boundary layer: 
Laminar and turbulent boundary layer on a flat plate, laminar sub layer, smooth and rough boundaries, drag 
and lift. 
 
Turbulent flow through pipes: Characteristics of turbulent flow, velocity distribution and variation of pipe 
friction factor, hydraulic grade line and total energy line. 
 
3.5 Open channel flow: 
Uniform and non-uniform flows, momentum and energy correction factors, specific energy and specific force, 
critical depth, rapidly varied flow, hydraulic jump, gradually varied flow , classification of surface profiles, 
control section, step method of integration of varied flow equation. 
 
3.6 Hydraulic Machines and Hydropower: 
Hydraulic turbines, types classification, Choice of turbin es, performance parameters, controls, characteristics, 
specific speed.  
 
Principles of hydropower development. 
4. Geotechnical Engineering: 
Soil Type and structure – gradation and particle size distribution – consistency limits.  Water in soil – capillary 
and structural – effective stress and pore water pres sure – permeability concept – field and laboratory 
determination of permeability – Seepage pressure – quick sand conditions – Shear strength determination – 
Mohr Coulomb concept. 
 
Compaction of soil – Laboratory and field tests. 
Compressibility and consolidation concept – consolidation theory – consolidation settlement analysis. 
Earth pressure theory and analysis for retaining walls, Application for sheet piles and Braced excavation. 
Bearing capacity of soil – approaches for analysis – Field tests – settlement analysis – stability of slope of earth 
walk. 
 
Subsurface exploration of soils – methods Foundation – Type and selection criteria for foundation of structures 
– Design criteria for foundation – Analysis of distribution of stress for footings and pile – pile group action-
pile load test. 
 
Ground improvement techniques. 
PAPER - II 
1. Construction Technology, Equipment, Planning and Management: 
1.1 Construction Technology: 
Engineering Materials:  
Physical properties of construction materials with respect to their use in construction - Stones, Bricks and 
Tiles; Lime, Cement, different types of Mortars and Concrete.  
 
Specific use of ferro cement, fibre reinforced C.C, High strength concrete. 
Timber, properties and defects – common preservation treatments. 
Use and selection of materials for specific use like Low Cost Housing, Mass Housing, High Rise Buildings. 
1.2 Construction: 
Masonry principles using Brick, stone, Blocks – construction detailing and strength characteristics. 
Types of plastering, pointing, flooring, roofing and construction features.  
Common repairs in buildings. 
Principles of functional planning of building for residents and specific use – Building code provisions. 
Basic principles of detailed and approximate estimating - specification writing and rate analysis – principles of 
valuation of real property. 
 
Machinery for earth work, concreting and their specific uses – F actors affecting selection of equipments – 
operating cost of Equipments. 
 
1.3 Construction Planning and Management: 
Construction activity – schedules- organization for construction industry – Quality assurance principles. 
Use of Basic principles of network – analysis in form of CPM and PERT – their use in construction 
monitoring, Cost optimization and resource allocation. 
 
Basic principles of Economic analysis and methods. 
Project profitability – Basic principles of Boot approach to financial planning – simple toll fixation criterions. 
2. Surveying and Transportation Engineering : 
2.1 Surveying: 
Common methods and instruments for distance and angle measurement for CE work – their use in plane table, 
traverse survey, leveling work, triangulation, contouring and topographical map. 
--- PAGE 17 ---
 
Basic principles of photogrammetry and remote sensing. 
2.2 Railway Engineering: 
Permanent way – components, types an d their functions – Functions and Design constituents of turn and 
crossings – Necessity of geometric design of track – Design of station and yards. 
 
2.3 Highway Engineering: 
Principles of Highway alignments – classification and geometrical design elements and standards for Roads. 
Pavement structure for flexible and rigid pavements - Design principles and methodology of pavements. 
Typical construction methods and standards of materials for stabilized soil, WBM, Bituminous works and CC 
roads. 
 
Surface and sub-surface drainage arrangements for roads - culvert structures. 
Pavement distresses and strengthening by overlays. 
Traffic surveys and their applications in traffic planning - Typical design features for channelized, intersection, 
rotary etc – signal designs – standard Traffic signs and markings. 
 
3. Hydrology, Water Resources and Engineering: 
3.1 Hydrology: 
Hydrological cycle, precipitation, evaporation, transp iration, infiltration, overland flow, hydrograph, flood 
frequency analysis, flood routing through a reservoir, channel flow routing-Muskingam method. 
 
3.2 Ground water flow: 
Specific yield, storage coefficient, coefficient of pe rmeability, confined and unconfined equifers, aquifers, 
aquitards, radial flow into a well under confined and unconfined conditions. 
 
3.3 Water Resources Engineering: 
Ground and surface water resource, singl e and multipurpose projects, storage capacity of reservoirs, reservoir 
losses, reservoir sedimentation. 
 
3.4 Irrigation Engineering: 
(i) Water requirements of crops: consumptive use, duty and delta, irrigation methods and their efficiencies. 
(ii) Canals: Distribution systems for canal irrigation,  canal capacity, canal losses, alignment of main and 
distributory canals, most efficient s ection, lined canals, their design, regi me theory, critical shear stress, bed 
load. 
 
(iii) Water logging: causes and control, salinity. 
(iv) Canal structures: Design of, head regulators, canal falls, aqueducts, metering flumes and canal outlets. 
(v) Diversion headwork: Principles and design of weirs of permeable and impermeable foundation, Khosla’s 
theory, energy dissipation.  
 
(vi) Storage works: Types of dams, design, principles of rigid gravity, stability analysis. 
(vii) Spillways: Spillway types, energy dissipation. 
(viii)River training: Objectives of river training, methods of river training. 
4. Environmental Engineering: 
4.1 Water Supply: 
Predicting demand for water, impurities of water and thei r significance, physical, chemical and bacteriological 
analysis, waterborne diseases, standards for potable water. 
 
4.2 Intake of water: 
Water treatment: principles of coagulation, flocculation and sedimentation; slow-; rapid-, pressure-, filters; 
chlorination, softening, removal of taste, odour and salinity.  
 
4.3 Sewerage systems: 
Domestic and industrial wastes, storm sewage–separate and combined systems, flow through sewers, design of 
sewers. 
 
4.4 Sewage characterization: 
BOD, COD, solids, dissolved oxygen, nitrogen and TOC. Standards of disposal in normal watercourse and on 
land. 
 
4.5 Sewage treatment: 
Working principles, units, chambers, sedimentation tanks,  trickling filters, oxidation ponds, activated sludge 
process, septic tank, disposal of sludge, recycling of wastewater. 
 
4.6 Solid waste: 
Collection and disposal in rural and urban contexts, management of long-term ill effects. 
5. Environmental pollution: 
--- PAGE 18 ---
Sustainable development. Radioactive wastes and disposal. Environmental impact assessment for thermal 
power plants, mines, river valley projects. Air pollution. Pollution control acts. 
 
 
 
 
COMMERCE AND ACCOUNTANCY 
PAPER - I 
Accounting and Finance 
Accounting, Taxation & Auditing 
1. Financial Accounting: 
Accounting as a Financial Information System; Impact of Behavioural Sciences. Accounting Standards e.g., 
Accounting for Depreciation, Inventories, Research and Development Costs, Long-term Construction 
Contracts, Revenue Recognition, Fixed Assets, Contingencies, Foreign Exchange Transactions, Investments 
and Government Grants, Cash Flow Statement, Earnings Per Share. 
 
Accounting for Share Capital Transactions including Bonus Shares, Right Shares, Employees Stock Option 
and Buy- Back of Securities. 
 
Preparation and Presentation of Company Final Accounts. 
Amalgamation, Absorption and Reconstruction of Companies. 
2. Cost Accounting: 
Nature and Functions of Cost Accounting.  Installation of Cost Accounting System. Cost Concepts related to 
Income Measurement, Profit Planning, Cost Control and Decision Making. 
 
Methods of Costing: Job Costing, Process Costing, Activity Based Costing. 
Volume – cost – Profit Relationship as a tool of Profit Planning. 
Incremental Analysis/ Differential Costing as a Tool of Pricing Decisions, Product Decisions, Make or Buy 
Decisions, Shut-Down Decisions etc. 
 
Techniques of Cost Control and Cost Reduction: Budgeting as a Tool of Planning and Control. Standard 
Costing and Variance Analysis.  
 
Responsibility Accounting and Divisional Performance Measurement. 
3. Taxation: 
Income Tax: Definitions; Basis of Charge; Incomes which do not form Part of Total Income. Simple problems 
of Computation of Income (of Individuals only) under  Various Heads, i.e., Salaries, Income from House 
Property, Profits and Gains from Business or Profession, Capital Gains, Income from other sources, Income of 
other Persons included in Assessee’s Total Income. 
 
Set - Off and Carry Forward of Loss. 
Deductions from Gross Total Income. Salient Features/Provisions Related to VAT and Services Tax. 
4. Auditing: 
Company Audit: Audit related to Divisible Profits, Dividends, Special investigations, Tax audit. 
Audit of Banking, Insurance, Non-Profit Organizations and Charitable Societies/Trusts/Organizations. 
Financial Management, Financial Institutions and Markets 
1. Financial Management: 
Finance Function: Nature, Scope and Objectives of Financial Management: Risk and Return Relationship. 
Tools of Financial Analysis: Ratio Analysis, Funds-Flow and Cash-Flow Statement. 
Capital Budgeting Decisions: Process, Procedures and Appraisal Methods. Risk and Uncertainty Analysis and 
Methods. 
 
Cost of capital: Concept, Computation of Specific Costs and Weighted Average Cost of Capital. CAPM as a 
Tool of Determining Cost of Equity Capital. 
 
Financing Decisions: Theories of Capital Structure - Net Income (NI) Approach, Net Operating Income (NOI) 
Approach, MM Approach and Traditional Approach. Desi gning of Capital structure: Types of Leverages 
(Operating, Financial and Combined), EBIT- EPS Analysis, and other Factors. 
 
Dividend Decisions and Valuation of Firm: Walter’s Model, MM Thesis, Gordan’s Model Lintner’s Model. 
Factors Affecting Dividend Policy.  
 
Working Capital Management: Planning of Working Capital. Determinants of Working Capital. Components 
of Working Capital Cash, Inventory and Receivables. 
 
Corporate Restructuring with focus on Mergers and Acquisitions (Financial aspects only). 
2. Financial Markets and Institutions: 
--- PAGE 19 ---
Indian Financial System: An Overview Money Markets:  Participants, Structure and Instruments. Commercial 
Banks. Reforms in Banking sector. Monetary and Credit Policy of RBI. RBI as a Regulator. 
 
Capital Market: Primary and Secondary Market. Fi nancial Market Instruments and Innovative Debt 
Instruments; SEBI as a Regulator. 
 
Financial Services: Mutual Funds, Venture Capital, Credit Rating Agencies, Insurance and IRDA. 
PAPER – II 
Organisation Theory and Behaviour, Human Resource Management and Industrial Relations 
Organisation Theory and Behaviour 
1. Organisation Theory: 
Nature and Concept of Organisation; External Environm ent of Organizations -Technological, Social, Political, 
Economical and Legal; Organizational Goals - Primar y and Secondary goals, Single and Multiple Goals; 
Management by Objectives.  
 
Evolution of Organisation Theory: Classical, Neo-classical and Systems Approach.  
Modern Concepts of Organisation Theory: Organisational Design, Organisational Structure and Organisational 
Culture. 
 
Organisational Design–Basic Challenges; Differentiation and Integration Process; Centralization and 
Decentralization Process; Standardi zation / Formalization and Mutual Ad justment. Coordinating Formal and 
Informal Organizations. Mechanistic and Organic Structures. 
 
Designing Organizational structures–Authority and Control; Line and Staff Functions, Specialization and 
Coordination. 
 
Types of Organization Structure –Functional. Matrix Structure, Project Structure. Nature and Basis of Power, 
Sources of Power, Power Structure and Politics. Impact  of Information Technology on Organizational Design 
and Structure. 
 
Managing Organizational Culture. 
2. Organisation Behaviour: 
Meaning and Concept; Individual in organizations: Personality, Theories, and Determinants; Perception - 
Meaning and Process. 
 
Motivation: Concepts, Theories and Applications.  Le adership-Theories and Styles . Quality of Work Life 
(QWL): Meaning and its impact on Performance, Ways of its Enhancement. Quality Circles (QC) – Meaning 
and their Importance. Management of Conflicts in Organizations. Transactional Analysis, Organizational 
Effectiveness, Management of Change. 
 
Human Resources Management and Industrial Relations 
1. Human Resources Management (HRM) :  
Meaning, Nature and Scope of HRM, Human Resource Planning, Job Analysis, Job Description, Job 
Specification, Recruitment Process, Selection Process, Orientation and Placement, Training and Development 
Process, Performance Appraisal and 360° Feed Back, Salary and Wage Administration, Job Evaluation, 
Employee Welfare, Promotions, Transfers and Separations. 
 
2. Industrial Relations (IR): 
Meaning, Nature, Importance and Scope of IR, Formation of Trade Unions, Trade Union Legislation, Trade 
Union Movement in India. Recognition of Trade Unions, Problems of Trade Unions in India. Impact of 
Liberalization on Trade Union Movement.  
 
Nature of Industrial Disputes : Strikes and Lockouts , Causes of Disputes, Prevention and Settlement of 
Disputes. 
 
Worker’s Participation in Management: Philosophy, Rationale, Present Day Status and Future Prospects. 
Adjudication and Collective Bargaining. 
Industrial Relations in Public Enterp rises, Absenteeism and Labour Turnov er in Indian Industries and their 
Causes and Remedies. 
 
ILO and its Functions. 
 
ECONOMICS 
PAPER – I 
1. Advanced Micro Economics: 
(a) Marshallian and Walrasiam Approaches to Price determination. 
(b) Alternative Distribution Theories: Ricardo, Kaldor, Kaleeki. 
(c) Markets Structure: Monopolistic Competition, Duopoly, Oligopoly. 
(d) Modern Welfare Criteria: Pareto Hicks & Scitovsky, Arrow’s Impossibility Theorem, A.K. Sen’s Social 
Welfare Function. 
 
--- PAGE 20 ---
2. Advanced Macro Economics: 
Approaches to Employment Income and Interest Rate determination: Classical, Keynes (IS-LM) curve, Neo 
classical synthesis and New classical, Theories of Interest Rate determination and Interest Rate Structure. 
 
3. Money - Banking and Finance: 
(a) Demand for and Supply of Money: Money Multiplier Quantity Theory of Money (Fisher, Pique and   
Friedman) and Keyne’s Theory on Demand for Money, Goals and Instruments of Monetary Management 
in Closed and Open Economies. Relation between the Central Bank and the Treasury. Proposal for ceiling 
on growth rate of money. 
 
(b)  Public Finance and its Role in Market Economy: In  stabilization of supply, allocation of resources and in 
distribution and development. Sources of Govt. revenue, forms of Taxes and Subsidies, their incidence and 
effects. Limits to taxation, loans, crowding-out effects and limits to borrowings. Public Expenditure and its 
effects. 
 
4. International Economics: 
(a) Old and New Theories of International Trade 
(i)  Comparative Advantage 
(ii)  Terms of Trade and Offer Curve. 
(iii)  Product Cycle and Strategic Trade Theories. 
(iv)  Trade as an engine of growth and theories of under development in an open economy. 
(b) Forms of Protection: Tariff and quota. 
(c) Balance of Payments Adjustments: Alternative Approaches. 
(i)  Price versus income, income adjustments under fixed exchange rates. 
(ii)  Theories of Policy Mix. 
(iii)  Exchange rate adjustments under capital mobility. 
(iv)  Floating Rates and their Implications for Developing Countries: Currency Boards. 
(v)  Trade Policy and Developing Countries. 
(vi)  BOP, adjustments and Policy Coordination in open economy macro-model. 
(vii)  Speculative attacks. 
(viii) Trade Blocks and Monetary Unions. 
(ix)  WTO: TRIMS, TRIPS, Domestic Measures, Different Rounds of WTO talks. 
5. Growth and Development: 
(a) (i) Theories of growth: Harrod’s model, 
     (ii) Lewis model of development with surplus labour, 
    (iii) Balanced and Unbalanced growth,  
    (iv) Human Capital and Economic Growth. 
     (v) Research and Development and Economic Growth 
 
(b) Process of Economic Development of Less developed countries: Myrdal and Kuzments on 
economic development and structural change: Role of Agriculture in Economic Development of less 
developed countries. 
 
(c) Economic development and International Trade and Investment, Role of Multinationals. 
(d) Planning and Economic Development: changing role of Markets and Planning, Private- Public 
Partnership. 
 
(e) Welfare indicators and measures of growth – Human Development Indices. The basic needs 
approach. 
 
(f) Development and Environmental Sustainab ility – Renewable and No n Renewable Resources, 
Environmental Degradation, Intergenerational equity development. 
 
PAPER – II 
1. Indian Economy in Pre-Independence Era: 
Land System and its changes, Comm ercialization of agriculture, Drain theory, Laissez faire theory and 
critique. Manufacture and Transport: Jute, Cotton, Railways, Money and Credit. 
 
2. Indian Economy after Independence: 
A  The Pre Liberalization Era:  
(i) Contribution of Vakil, Gadgil and V.K.R.V. Rao. 
(ii) Agriculture: Land Reforms and land tenure sy stem, Green Revolution and capital formation in 
agriculture. 
 
(iii) Industry Trends in composition and growth, Ro le of public and private sector, Small scale and 
cottage industries. 
 
(iv) National and Per capita income: patterns, trends, aggregate and Sectoral composition and changes 
their in. 
 
(v) Broad factors determining National Income and distribution, Measures of poverty, Trends in 
poverty and inequality. 
 
--- PAGE 21 ---
B The Post Liberalization Era: 
(i) New Economic Reform and Agriculture: Agriculture and WTO, Food processing, Subsidies, 
Agricultural prices and public distribution system, Impact of public expenditure on agricultural 
growth. 
 
(ii) New Economic Policy and Industry: Strategy of industrialization, Privatization, Disinvestments, 
Role of foreign direct investment and multinationals. 
 
(iii) New Economic Policy and Trade: Intellectual property rights: Implications of TRIPS, TRIMS, 
GATS 
and new EXIM policy. 
 
(iv) New Exchange Rate Regime: Partial and full convertibility, Capital account convertibility. 
(v) New Economic Policy and Public Finance: Fiscal Responsibility Act, Twelfth Finance 
Commission and Fiscal Federalism and Fiscal Consolidation. 
 
(vi) New Economic Policy and Monetary system. Role of RBI under the new regime. 
(vii) Planning: From central Planning to indicative planning, Relation between planning and markets 
for growth and decentralized planning: 73rd and 74th Constitutional amendments. 
 
(viii)New Economic Policy and Employment: Empl oyment and poverty, Rural wages, Employment 
Generation, Poverty alleviation schemes, New Rural, Employment Guarantee Scheme. 
 
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING 
PAPER - I 
1. Circuit Theory: 
Circuit components; network graphs; KCL, KVL; circuit analysis methods: nodal analysis, mesh analysis; 
basic network theorems and applications; transient analysis: RL, RC and RLC circuits; sinusoidal steady state 
analysis; resonant circuits; coupled circuits; balanced 3-phase circuits; Two-port networks.  
 
2. Signals & Systems: 
Representation of continuous–time and discrete-time si gnals & systems; LTI syst ems; convolution; impulse 
response; time-domain analysis of LTI systems based on convolution and differential/difference equations. 
Fourier transform, Laplace transform, Z-transform, Transfer function. Samp ling and recovery of signals DFT, 
FFT Processing of analog signals through discrete-time systems. 
 
3. E.M. Theory: 
Maxwell’s equations, wave propagation in bounded me dia. Boundary conditions, reflection and refraction of 
plane waves. Transmission line: travelling and standing waves, impedance matching, Smith chart.  
 
4. Analog Electronics: 
Characteristics and equivalent circuits (large and small-signal) of Diode, BJT, JFET and MOSFET. Diode 
circuits: clipping, clamping, rectifier. Biasing and bi as stability. FET amplifiers. Current mirror; Amplifiers: 
single and multi-stage, differential, operational, feedback and power. An alysis of amplifiers; frequency-
response of amplifiers. OPAMP circuits. 
 
Filters; sinusoidal oscillators: criterion for oscillation;  single-transistor and OPAMP configurations. Function 
generators and wave-shaping circuits. Linear and switching power supplies. 
 
5. Digital Electronics: 
Boolean algebra; minimization of Boolean functions; logi c gates; digital IC families (DTL, TTL, ECL, MOS, 
CMOS). Combinational circuits: arithmetic circuits, c ode converters, multiplexers and decoders. Sequential 
circuits: latches and flip-flops, counters and shift-regist ers. Comparators, timers, mu lti-vibrators. Sample and 
hold circuits, ADCs and DACs. Semiconductor memories. Logic implementation using programmable devices 
(ROM, PLA, FPGA). 
 
6. Energy Conversion: 
Principles of electromechanical en ergy conversion: Torque and emf in rotating machines. DC machines: 
characteristics and performance analysis; starting and sp eed control of motors; Transformers: principles of 
operation and analysis; regulation, efficiency; 3-ph ase transformers. 3-phase induction machines and 
synchronous machines: characteristics and performance analysis; speed control. 
 
7. Power Electronics and Electric Drives: 
Semiconductor power devices: diode, transistor, thyristo r, triac, GTO and MOSFET–st atic characteristics and 
principles of operation; triggering circuits; phase control rectifiers; bridge converters: fully-controlled and half-
controlled; principles of thyristor choppers and inverters; DC-DC converters; Switch mode inverter; basic 
concepts of speed control of DC and AC Motor drives applications of variable-speed drives. 
 
8. Analog Communication: 
Random variables: continuous, discrete; probability, probability functions. Statistical averages; probability 
models; Random signals and noise: white noise, noise equivalent bandwidth; signal transmission with noise; 
signal to noise ratio. Linear CW modulation: Amplitude modulation: DSB, DSB-SC and SSB. Modulators and 
Demodulators; Phase and Frequency modulation: PM & FM signals; narrowband FM; generation & detection 
of FM and PM, Deemphasis, Preemphasis. CW modulati on system: Superhetrodyne receivers, AM receivers, 
--- PAGE 22 ---
communication receivers, FM receivers, phase locked loop , SSB receiver Signal to noise ratio calculation for 
AM and FM receivers. 
PAPER - II 
1. Control Systems: 
Elements of control systems; block-diagram representation; open-loop & closed-loop systems; principles and 
applications of feed-back. Control system components. LTI systems: time-domain and transform-domain 
analysis. Stability: Routh Hurwitz criterion, root-loci, Bodeplots and polar plots, Nyquist’s criterion; Design of 
lead-lad compensators. Proportional, PI, PID controllers. State-variable representation and analysis of control 
systems. 
 
2. Microprocessors and Microcomputers: 
PC organisation; CPU, instruction set, register set, timing diagram, programming, interrupts, memory 
interfacing, I/O interfacing, programmable peripheral devices. 
 
3. Measurement and Instrumentation: 
Error analysis; measurement of curr ent, voltage, power, energy, powe r-factor, resistance, inductance, 
capacitance and frequency; bridge measurement. Signal conditioning circuit; Electronic measuring 
instruments: multimeter, CRO, digital voltmeter, frequ ency counter, Q-meter, sp ectrum-analyzer, distortion-
meter.  Transducers: thermocouple, thermistor, LVDT, strain-gauge, piezo-electric crystal. 
 
4. Power Systems: Analysis and Control: 
Steady-state performance of overhead transmission lines and cables; princi ples of active and reactive power 
transfer and distribution; per-unit quantities; bus ad mittance and impedance matrices; load flow; voltage 
control and power factor correction; economic operation; symmetrical components, analysis of symmetrical 
and unsymmetrical faults. Concept of system stability: swing curves and equal area criterion. Static VAR 
system. Basic concepts of HVDC transmission. 
 
5. Power System Protection: 
Principles of overcurrent, differential and distance protection. Concept of solid state relays. Circuit breakers. 
Computer aided protection: Introduction; line bus, generator, transformer protection; numeric relays and 
application of DSP to protection. 
 
6. Digital Communication: 
Pulse code modulation (PCM), differential pulse code modulation (DPCM), delta modulation (DM), Digital 
modulation and demodulation schemes: amplitude, phas e and frequency keying sc hemes (ASK, PSK, FSK). 
Error control coding: error detection and correction, linear block codes, convolution codes. Information 
measure 
and source coding. Data networks, 7-layer architecture.  
 
GEOGRAPHY 
PAPER - I 
PRINCIPLES OF GEOGRAPHY 
Physical Geography: 
1. Geomorphology: Factors controlling landform development; endogenetic and exogenetic forces; Origin and 
evolution of the earth’s crust; Fundam entals of geomagnetism; Physical conditions of the earth’s interior; 
Geosynclines; Continental drift; Isostasy; Plate tect onics; Recent views on mount ain building; Vulcanicity; 
Earthquakes and Tsunamis; Concepts of geomorphic cycles and Landscape development ; Denudation 
chronology; Channel morphology; Erosion surfaces ; Slope development; Ap plied Geomorphology : 
Geohydrology, economic geology and environment. 
 
2. Climatology:  Temperature and pressure belts of the worl d; Heat budget of the earth; Atmospheric 
circulation; atmospheric stability and instability. Planet ary and local winds; Monsoons and jet streams; Air 
masses and fronto genesis, Temperate and tropical cyclones; Types and distribution of precipitation; Weather 
and Climate; Koppen’s, Thornthwaite’s and Trewartha’s classification of world clim ates; Hydrological cycle; 
Global climatic change and role and response of man in climatic changes, Applied climatology and Urban 
climate.  
 
3. Oceanography: Bottom topography of the Atlantic, Indian and Pacific Oceans; Temperature and salinity of 
the oceans; Heat and salt budgets, Ocean deposits; Waves, currents and tides; Marine resources: biotic, mineral 
and energy resources; Coral reefs, coral bleaching; sealevel changes; law of the sea and marine pollution. 
 
4. Biogeography:  Genesis of soils; Classification and distribution of soils; Soil profile; Soil erosion, 
Degradation and conservation; Factors influencing world distribution of plants and animals; Problems of 
deforestation and conservation measures; Social forestry; agro-forestry; Wild life; Major gene pool centres.  
 
5. Environmental Geography:  Principle of ecology; Human ecological adaptations; Influence of man on 
ecology and environment; Global and regional ecological changes and imbalances; Ecosystem their 
management and conservation; Environmental degradati on, management and conservation; Biodiversity and 
sustainable development; Environmental policy; Environmental hazards a nd remedial measures; 
Environmental education and legislation. 
 
Human Geography: 
1. Perspectives in Human Geography: Areal differentiation; regional synthesis; Dichotomy and dualism; 
Environmentalism; Quantitative revolution and locational analysis; radical, behavioural, human and welfare 
approaches; Languages, religions and secularisation; Cultural regions of the world; Human development index. 
--- PAGE 23 ---
 
2. Economic Geography:  World economic development: measuremen t and problems; World resources and 
their distribution; Energy crisis; the limits to growth; World agriculture: typology of agricultural regions; 
agricultural inputs and productivity; Food and nutrition pr oblems; Food security; famine: causes, effects and 
remedies; World industries: locational patterns and problems; patterns of world trade. 
 
3. Population and Settlement Geography: Growth and distribution of world population; demographic 
attributes; Causes and consequences of migration; concepts of over-under-and optimum population; Population 
theories, world population problems and policies, Social well-being and quality of life; Population as social 
capital. Types and patterns of rural settlements; Environm ental issues in rural settlements; Hierarchy of urban 
settlements; Urban morphology: Concepts of primate city and rank-size rule; Functional classification of 
towns; Sphere of urban influence; Rural urban fringe; Satellite towns; Problems and remedies of urbanization; 
Sustainable development of cities. 
 
4. Regional Planning: Concept of a region; Types of regions and methods of regionalisation; Growth centres 
and growth poles; Regional imbalances; regional development strategies; environmental issues in regional 
planning; Planning for sustainable development.  
 
5. Models, Theories and Laws in Human Geography:  Systems analysis in Human geography; Malthusian, 
Marxian and demographic transition models; Central Pl ace theories of Christalle r and Losch;Perroux and 
Boudeville; Von Thunen’s model of agricultural location; Weber’s model of industrial location; Ostov’s model 
of stages of growth. Heartland and Rimland theories; Laws of international boundaries and frontiers. 
 
PAPER – II 
GEOGRAPHY OF INDIA 
1. Physical Setting:  Space relationship of India with neighboring countries; Structure and relief; Drainage 
system and watersheds; Physiographic regions; Mechanism of Indian monsoons and rainfall patterns, Tropical 
cyclones and western disturbances; Floods and droughts; Climatic regions; Natural vegetation; Soil types and 
their distributions. 
 
2. Resources: Land, surface and ground water, energy, minerals , biotic and marine resources; Forest and wild 
life resources and their conservation; Energy crisis.  
 
3. Agriculture:  Infrastructure: irrigation, seeds, fertilizers, power; Institutional factors: land holdings, land 
tenure and land reforms; Cropping pattern, agricultural productivity, agricultural intensity, crop combination, 
land capability; Agro and social-forestry; Green revolution and its socio-economic and ecological implications; 
Significance of dry farming; Livestock resources and white revolution; aqua - culture; sericulture, apiculture 
and poultry; agricultural regionalisation; agro-climatic zones; agro- ecological regions.  
 
4. Industry:  Evolution of industries; Locational factors of cotton, jute, textile, iron and steel, aluminium, 
fertilizer, paper, chemical and pharmaceutical, automobile, cottage and agro-based industries; Industrial houses 
and complexes including public sector undertakings; Industrial regionalisation; New industrial policies; 
Multinationals 
and liberalization; Special Economic Zones; Tourism including eco-tourism.  
 
5. Transport, Communication and Trade: Road, railway, waterway, airway and pipeline networks and their 
complementary roles in regional development; Growing importance of ports on national and foreign trade; 
Trade balance; Trade Policy; Export processing zones; Developments in communication and information 
technology and their impacts on economy and society; Indian space programme. 
 
6. Cultural Setting: Historical Perspective of Indian Society; Racial, linguistic and ethnic diversities; religious 
minorities; major tribes, tribal areas and their problems; cultural regions; Growth, distribution and density of 
population; Demographic attributes: sex-ratio, age stru cture, literacy rate, work-force, dependency ratio, 
longevity; migration (inter-regional, intra- regional and international) and associated problems; Population 
problems and policies; Health indicators. 
 
7. Settlements:  Types, patterns and morphology of rural settlements; Urban developments; Morphology of 
Indian cities; Functional classification of Indian citie s; Conurbations and metropolitan regions; urban sprawl; 
Slums and associated problems; town planning; Problems of urbanization and remedies.  
 
8. Regional Development and Planning: Experience of regional planning in India; Five Year Plans; 
Integrated rural development programmes; Panchayati Raj and decentralised planning; Command area 
development; Watershed management; Planning for backwa rd area, desert, drought prone, hill, tribal area 
development; multi-level planning; Regional planning and development of island territories. 
 
9. Political Aspects: Geographical basis of Indian federalism; State reorganisation; Emergence of new states; 
Regional consciousness and inter state issues; international boundary of India and related issues; Cross border 
terrorism; India’s role in world affairs; Geopolitics of South Asia and Indian Ocean realm. 
 
10. Contemporary Issues: Ecological issues: Environmental hazards: landslides, earthquakes, Tsunamis, 
floods and droughts, epidemics; Issues relating to environmental pollution; Changes in patterns of land use; 
Principles of environmental impact assessment and environmental management; Population explosion and food 
security; Environmental degradation; Deforestation, desertification and soil erosion; Problems of agrarian and 
industrial unrest; Regional disparities in economic development; Concept of sustainable growth and 
development; Environmental awareness; Linkage of rivers; Globalisation and Indian economy. 
 
NOTE: Candidates will be required to answer one compulso ry map question pertinent to subjects covered by 
this paper. 
 
 
--- PAGE 24 ---
 
GEOLOGY 
PAPER - I 
1. General Geology: 
The Solar System, Meteorites, Origin and interior of  the earth and age of earth; Volcanoes- causes and 
products, Volcanic belts; Earthquakes-causes, effects, Seismic zones of India; Island arcs, trenches and mid-
ocean ridges; Continental drifts; Seafloor spreading, Plate tectonics; Isostasy. 
 
2. Geomorphology and Remote Sensing: 
Basic concepts of geomorphology; Weathering and soil formations; Landforms, slopes and drainage; 
Geomorphic cycles and their interpretation; Morphology and its relation to structures and lithology; Coastal 
geomorphology; Applications of geomorphology in mineral prospecting, civil engineering; Hydrology and 
environmental studies; Geomorphology of Indian subcontinent. 
 
Aerial photographs and their interpretation-merits and limitations; The Electromagnetic spectrum; Orbiting 
satellites and sensor systems; Indian Remote Sensing Satellites; Satellites data products; Applications of 
remote sensing in geology; The Geographic Informati on Systems (GIS) and Global Positioning System (GPS) 
– its applications. 
 
3. Structural Geology: Principles of geologic mapping and map reading, Projection diagrams, Stress and 
strain ellipsoid and stress-strain relationships of elastic, plastic and viscous materials; Strain markers in 
deformed rocks; Behaviour of minerals and rocks under deformation conditions; Folds and faults classification 
and mechanics; Structural analysis of folds, foliations, lineations, joints and faults, unconformities; Time-
relationship between crystallization and deformation. 
 
4. Paleontology: 
Species- definition and nomenclature; Megafossils and Microfossils; Modes of preservation of fossils; 
Different kinds of microfossils; Application of microfossils in correlation, petroleum exploration, paleoclimatic 
and paleoceanographic studies; Evolutionary trend in Hominidae, Equidae and Proboscidae; Siwalik fauna; 
Gondwana flora and fauna and its importance; Index fossils and their significance. 
 
5. Indian Stratigraphy: 
Classification of stratigraphic sequences: lithostrat igraphic, biostratigraphic, chronostratigraphic and 
magnetostratigraphic and their interrelationships; Distribution and classification of Precambrian rocks of India; 
Study of stratigraphic distribution and lithology of Phanerozoic rocks of India with reference to fauna, flora 
and economic importance; Majo r boundary problemsC ambrian/Precambrian, Permian/Triassic, 
Cretaceous/Tertiary and Pliocene/Pleistocene; Study of climatic conditions, pa leogeography and igneous 
activity in the Indian subcontinent in the geological past; Tectonic framework of India; Evolution of the 
Himalayas. 
 
6. Hydrogeology and Engineering Geology: 
Hydrologic cycle and genetic classification of water; Movement of subsurface wa ter; Springs; Porosity, 
permeability, hydraulic conductivity, transmissivity and st orage coefficient, classification of aquifers; Water-
bearing characteristics of rocks; Gr oundwater chemistry; Salt water intrusion; Types of wells; Drainage basin 
morphometry; Exploration for groundwater; Ground-water recharge; Problems and management of 
groundwater; Rainwater harvesting; Engineering proper ties of rocks; Geological investigations for dams, 
tunnels highways, railway and bridges; Rock as cons truction material; Landslides-causes, prevention and 
rehabilitation; Earthquake-resistant structures. 
 
PAPER - II 
1. Mineralogy: 
Classification of crystals into systems and classes of  symmetry; International system of crystallographic 
notation; Use of projection diagrams to represent crystal symmetry; Elements of X-ray crystallography.  
 
Physical and chemical characters of ro ck forming silicate mineral groups; St ructural classification of silicates; 
Common minerals of igneous and metamorphic rocks; Minerals of the carbonate, phosphate, sulphide and 
halide groups; Clay minerals.  
 
Optical properties of common rock forming minerals; Pleochroism, extinction angle, double refraction, 
birefringence, twinning and dispersion in minerals. 
 
2. Igneous and Metamorphic Petrology:  
Generation and crystallization of magmas; Crystallization of albite-anorthite, diopside-anorthite and diopside-
wollastonite-silica systems; Bowen’s Reaction Principle; Magmatic differentation and assimilation; 
Petrogenetic significance of the textures and structures of igneous rocks; Petrography and petrogenesis of 
granite, syenite, diorite, basic and ultrabasic groups, char nockite, anorthosite and alkaline rocks; Carbonatites; 
Deccan volcanic province.  
 
Types and agents of metamorphism; Metamorphic grades and zones; Phase rule; Facies of regional and contact 
metamorphism; ACF and AKF diagrams; Textures and structures of metamorphic rocks; Metamorphism of 
arenaceous, argillaceous and basic rocks; Minerals assemblages Retrograde metamorphism; Metasomatism and 
granitisation, migmatites, Granulite terrains of India.  
 
3. Sedimentary Petrology: 
--- PAGE 25 ---
Sediments and Sedimentary rocks: Processes of formati on; digenesis and lithification; Clastic and non-clastic 
rocks-their classification, petrography and depositio nal environment; Sedimentary facies and provenance; 
Sedimentary structures and their sign ificance; Heavy minerals and their significance; Sedimentary basins of 
India. 
 
4. Economic Geology: 
Ore, ore minerals and gangue, tenor of ore, classification of ore deposits; Process of formation of minerals 
deposits; Controls of ore localization; Ore textures and structures; Metallogenic epochs and provinces; 
Geology of the important Indian deposits of aluminium, chromium, copper, gold, iron, lead zinc, manganese, 
titanium, uranium and thorium and industrial minerals; Deposits of coal and petroleum in India; National 
Mineral Policy; Conservation and utilization of mineral resources; Marine mineral resources and Law of Sea.  
 
5. Mining Geology: 
Methods of prospecting-geological, geophysical, geochemical and geobotanical; Techniques of sampling; 
Estimation of reserves or ore; Methods of exploratio n and mining metallic ores, industrial minerals, marine 
mineral resources and building stones; Mineral beneficiation and ore dressing. 
 
6. Geochemistry and Environmental Geology: 
Cosmic abundance of elements; Composition of the planets and meteorites; Structure and composition of Earth 
and distribution of elements; Trace elements; Elements  of crystal chemistry-types of chemical bonds, 
coordination number; Isomorphism and polymorphism; Elementary thermodynamics.  
 
Natural hazards-floods, mass wasting, costal hazards , earthquakes and volcanic activity and mitigation; 
Environmental impact of urbanization, mining, industri al and radioactive waste disposal, use of fertilizers, 
dumping of mine waste and fly ash; Pollution of grou nd and surface water, marine pollution; Environment 
protection legislative measures in India; Sea level changes: causes and impact. 
 
 
 
HISTORY 
PAPER - I 
1. Sources: 
Archaeological sources:  
Exploration, excavation, epigraphy, numismatics, monuments Literary sources:  
Indigenous: Primary and secondary; poe try, scientific literature, literature, literature in regional languages, 
religious literature. 
 
Foreign accounts: Greek, Chinese and Arab writers. 
2. Pre-history and Proto-history: 
Geographical factors; hunting and gathering (paleolithic and mesolithic); Beginning of agriculture (neolithic 
and 
chalcolithic).  
 
3. Indus Valley Civilization: 
Origin, date, extent, characteristics, decline, survival and significance, art and architecture. 
4. Megalithic Cultures: 
Distribution of pastoral and farming cultures outside the Indus, Development of community life, Settlements, 
Development of agriculture, Crafts, Pottery, and Iron industry. 
 
5. Aryans and Vedic Period: 
Expansions of Aryans in India.  
Vedic Period: Religious and philosophic literature; Transformation from Rig Vedic period to the later Vedic 
period; Political, social and economical life; Significance of the Vedic Age; Evolution of Monarchy and Varna 
system. 
 
6. Period of Mahajanapadas: 
Formation of States (Mahajanapada) : Republics an d monarchies; Rise of urban centres; Trade routes; 
Economic growth; Introduction of coinage; Spread of Jainism and Buddhism; Rise of Magadha and Nandas. 
 
Iranian and Macedonian invasions and their impact. 
7. Mauryan Empire: 
Foundation of the Mauryan Empire, Chandragupta, Kautilya and Arthashastra; Ashoka; Concept of Dharma; 
Edicts; Polity, Administration; Economy; Art, architectur e and sculpture; External contacts; Religion; Spread 
of religion; Literature.  
 
Disintegration of the empire; Sungas and Kanvas. 
8. Post - Mauryan Period (Indo-Greeks, Sakas, Kushanas, Western Kshatrapas): 
Contact with outside world; growth of urban centres, economy, coinage, development of religions, Mahayana, 
social conditions, art, architecture, culture, literature and science. 
 
--- PAGE 26 ---
9. Early State and Society in Eastern India, Deccan and South India: 
Kharavela, The Satavahanas, Tamil States of the Sangam Age; Administration, economy, land grants, coinage, 
trade guilds and urban centres; Buddhist centres; Sangam literature and culture; Art and architecture. 
 
10. Guptas, Vakatakas and Vardhanas: 
Polity and administration, Economic conditions, Coinage of the Guptas, Land grants, Decline of urban centres, 
Indian feudalism, Caste system, Position of women, Education and educational institutions; Nalanda, 
Vikramshila and Vallabhi, Literature, scientific literature, art and architecture. 
 
11. Regional States during Gupta Era: 
The Kadambas, Pallavas, Chalukyas of Badami; Polity and Administration, Trade guilds, Literature; growth of 
Vaishnava and Saiva religions. Tamil Bhakti movement, Sh ankaracharya; Vedanta; Institutions of temple and 
temple architecture; Palas, Senas, Rashtrakutas, Parama ras, Polity and administration; Cultural aspects. Arab 
conquest of Sind; Alberuni, The Chalukyas of Kalyana, Cholas, Hoysalas, Pandyas; Polity and Administration; 
local Government; Growth of art and architecture, religious sects, Institution of temple and Mathas, Agraharas, 
education and literature, economy and society.  
 
12. Themes in Early Indian Cultural History: 
Languages and texts, major stages in the evolution of art and architecture, major philosophical thinkers and 
schools, ideas in Science and Mathematics. 
 
13. Early Medieval India, 750-1200: 
-  Polity: Major political developments in Northern India and the Peninsula, origin and the rise of Rajputs - The   
Cholas: administration, village economy and society 
 
-  “Indian Feudalism” 
-  Agrarian economy and urban settlements 
-  Trade and commerce 
-  Society: the status of the Brahman and the new social order 
-  Condition of women 
-  Indian science and technology 
14. Cultural Traditions in India, 750-1200: 
-  Philosophy: Skankaracharya and Vedanta, Ramanuja and Vishishtadvaita, Madhva and Brahma-Mimansa 
-  Religion: Forms and features of religion, Tamil devo tional cult, growth of Bhakti,  Islam and its arrival in 
India,   Sufism 
 
- Literature: Literature in Sanskrit, growth of Tamil literature, literature in the newly developing languages, 
Kalhan’s Rajtarangini, Alberuni’s India 
 
-  Art and Architecture: Temple architecture, sculpture, painting 
15. The Thirteenth Century: 
- Establishment of the Delhi Sultanate: The Ghurian invasions – factors behind Ghurian success 
- Economic, social and cultural consequences 
- Foundation of Delhi Sultanate and early Turkish Sultans 
- Consolidation: The rule of Iltutmish and Balban  
  
16. The Fourteenth Century: 
-  “The Khalji Revolution” 
-  Alauddin Khalji: Conquests and territtorial expansion, agrarian and economic measures 
-  Muhammad Tughluq: Major projects, agrarian measures, bureaucracy of Muhammad Tughluq  
- Firuz Tughluq: Agrarian measures, achievements in civil engineering and public works, decline of the 
Sultanate, foreign contacts and Ibn Battuta’s account 
 
17. Society, Culture and Economy in the Thirteenth and Fourteenth Centuries: 
- Society: composition of rural societ y, ruling classes, town dwellers, women, religious classes, caste and 
slavery under the Sultanate, Bhakti movement, Sufi movement 
 
- Culture: Persian literature, literature in the regional languages of North India, literature in the languages of 
South India, Sultanate architecture and new structural forms, painting, evolution of a composite culture 
 
- Economy: Agricultural production, rise of urban economy and non-agricultural production, trade and 
commerce 
 
18. The Fifteenth and Early Sixteenth Century – Political Developments and Economy: 
- Rise of Provincial Dynasties: Bengal, Kashmir (Zainul Abedin), Gujarat, Malwa, Bahmanids 
- The Vijayanagra Empire 
- Lodis 
--- PAGE 27 ---
- Mughal Empire, First phase: Babur and Humayun 
- The Sur Empire: Sher Shah’s administration 
- Portuguese Colonial enterprise 
- Bhakti and Sufi Movements 
19. The Fifteenth and early Sixteenth Century – Society and Culture: 
- Regional cultural specificities 
- Literary traditions 
- Provincial architecture 
- Society, culture, literature and the arts in Vijayanagara Empire. 
20. Akbar: 
- Conquests and consolidation of the Empire 
- Establishment of Jagir and Mansab systems 
- Rajput policy 
- Evolution of religious and social outlook, theory of Sulh-i-kul and religious policy 
- Court patronage of art and technology 
21. Mughal Empire in the Seventeenth Century: 
- Major administrative policies of Jahangir, Shahjahan and Aurangzeb  
- The Empire and the Zamindars 
- Religious policies of Jahangir, Shahjahan and Aurangzeb 
- Nature of the Mughal State 
- Late Seventeenth century crisis and the revolts 
- The Ahom Kingdom 
- Shivaji and the early Maratha Kingdom. 
22. Economy and Society in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries: 
- Population, agricultural production, craft production 
- Towns, commerce with Europe through Dutch, English and French companies : a trade revolution 
- Indian mercantile classes, banking, insurance and credit systems 
- Condition of peasants, condition of women 
- Evolution of the Sikh community and the Khalsa Panth 
23. Culture in the Mughal Empire: 
- Persian histories and other literature 
- Hindi and other religious literature 
- Mughal architecture 
- Mughal painting 
- Provincial architecture and painting - Classical music 
- Science and technology 
24. The Eighteenth Century: 
- Factors for the decline of the Mughal Empire 
- The regional principalities: Nizam’s Deccan, Bengal, Awadh 
- Maratha ascendancy under the Peshwas 
- The Maratha fiscal and financial system 
- Emergence of Afghan Power, Battle of Panipat:1761 
- State of politics, culture and economy on the eve of the British conquest 
PAPER - II 
1. European Penetration into India: 
The Early European Settlements; The Portuguese and the Dutch; The English and the French East India 
Companies; Their struggle for supremacy; Carnatic Wars; Bengal -The conflict between the English and the 
Nawabs of Bengal; Siraj and the English; The Battle of Plassey; Significance of Plassey. 
 
2. British Expansion in India: 
Bengal – Mir Jafar and Mir Kasim; The Battle of Buxar; Mysore; The Marathas; The three Anglo-Maratha 
Wars; The Punjab. 
 
3. Early Structure of the British Raj: 
The early administrative structure; From diarchy to di rect control; The Regulating Act (1773); The Pitt’s India 
Act (1784); The Charter Act (1833); The voice of free trade and the changing character of British colonial rule; 
The English utilitarian and India. 
--- PAGE 28 ---
 
4. Economic Impact of British Colonial Rule: 
(a) Land revenue settlements in British India; The Permanent Settlement; Ryotwari Settlement; Mahalwari 
Settlement; Economic impact of the revenue arrangements; Commercialization of agriculture; Rise of landless 
agrarian labourers; Impoverishment of the rural society. 
 
(b) Dislocation of traditional trade and commerce; De-indus trialisation; Decline of tr aditional crafts; Drain of 
wealth; Economic transformation of India; Railroad and communication network including telegraph and 
postal services; Famine and poverty in the rural interior; European business enterprise and its limitations.  
 
5. Social and Cultural Developments: 
The state of indigenous education, its dislocation; Orientalist-Anglicist controversy, The introduction of 
western 
education in India; The rise of press, literature and pub lic opinion; The rise of modern vernacular literature; 
Progress of science; Christian missionary activities in India. 
 
6. Social and Religious Reform movements in Bengal and Other Areas: 
Ram Mohan Roy, The Brahmo Movement; Devendranath Tagore; Iswarchandra Vidyasagar; The Young 
Bengal Movement; Dayanada Saraswati; The social reform movements in India including Sati, widow 
remarriage, child marriage etc.; The  contribution of Indian renaissance to the growth of modern India; Islamic 
revivalism – the Feraizi and Wahabi Movements. 
 
7. Indian Response to British Rule: 
Peasant movements and tribal uprisings in the 18th and 19th centuries including the Rangpur Dhing (1783), the 
Kol Rebellion (1832), the Mopla Rebellion in Malabar (1 841-1920), the Santal Hul (1855), Indigo Rebellion 
(1859-60), Deccan Uprising (1875) and the Munda Ulgul an (18991900); Th e Great Revolt of 1857 - Origin, 
character, causes of failure, the consequences; The shift in the character of peasant uprisings in the post-1857 
period; the peasant movements of the 1920s and 1930s. 
 
8. Factors leading to the birth of Indian Nationalism; Politics of Association; The Foundation of the Indian 
National Congress; The Safety-valve thesis relating to th e birth of the Congress; Programme and objectives of 
Early Congress; the social composition of early Congress leadership; the Moderates and Extremists; The 
Partition of Bengal (1905); The Swadeshi Movement in Bengal; the economic and political aspects of 
Swadeshi Movement; The beginning of revolutionary extremism in India. 
 
9. Rise of Gandhi; Character of Gandhian nationalis m; Gandhi’s popular appeal; Rowlatt Satyagraha; the 
Khilafat Movement; the Non-cooperation Movement; National politics from the end of the Non-cooperation 
movement to the beginning of the Civil Disobedience movement; the two phases of the Civil Disobedience 
Movement; Simon Commission; The Nehru Report; th e Round Table Conferen ces; Nationalism and the 
Peasant Movements; Nationalism and Working class movements; Women and Indian youth and students in 
Indian politics (1885-1947); the election of 1937 and the formation of ministries; Cripps Mission; the Quit 
India Movement; the Wavell Plan; The Cabinet Mission.  
 
10. Constitutional Developments in the Colonial India between 1858 and 1935. 
11. Other strands in the National Movement.  
The Revolutionaries: Bengal, the Punjab, Maharashtra, U.P, the Madras Presidency, Outside India. 
The Left; The Left within the Congress: Jawaharlal Nehru, Subhas Chandra Bose, the Congress Socialist Party; 
the Communist Party of India, other left parties. 
 
12. Politics of Separatism; the Muslim League; the Hindu Mahasabha; Communalism and the politics of 
partition; Transfer of power; Independence. 
 
13. Consolidation as a Nation; Nehru’s Foreign Policy; India and her neighbours (1947-1964); The linguistic 
reorganization of States (1935-1947); Regionalism and regional inequality; Integration of Princely States; 
Princes in electoral politics; the Question of National Language. 
 
14. Caste and Ethnicity after 1947; Backward castes and tribes in postcolonial electoral politics; Dalit 
movements. 
 
15. Economic development and political change; Land reforms; the politics of planning and rural 
reconstruction; Ecology and environmental policy in post – colonial India; Progress of science. 
 
16. Enlightenment and Modern ideas:  
(i) Major ideas of Enlightenment: Kant, Rousseau 
(ii) Spread of Enlightenment in the colonies 
(iii) Rise of socialist ideas (up to Marx); spread of Marxian Socialism. 
17. Origins of Modern Politics: 
(i) European States System. 
(ii) American Revolution and the Constitution. 
(iii) French revolution and aftermath, 17891815. 
(iv) American Civil War with reference to Abraham Lincoln and the abolition of slavery. 
(v) British Democratic Politics, 18151850; Parliamentary Reformers, Free Traders, Chartists. 
--- PAGE 29 ---
18. Industrialization: 
(i) English Industrial Revolution: Causes and Impact on Society 
(ii) Industrialization in other countries: USA, Germany, Russia, Japan 
(iii) Industrialization and Globalization. 
19. Nation-State System: 
(i) Rise of Nationalism in 19th century 
(ii) Nationalism: state-building in Germany and Italy 
(iii) Disintegration of Empires in the face of the emergence of nationalities across the world. 
20. Imperialism and Colonialism: 
(i) South and South-East Asia 
(ii) Latin America and South Africa 
(iii) Australia 
(iv) Imperialism and free trade: Rise of neo-imperialism. 
21. Revolution and Counter-Revolution: 
(i) 19th Century European revolutions 
(ii) The Russian Revolution of 19171921 
(iii) Fascist Counter-Revolution, Italy and Germany. 
(iv) The Chinese Revolution of 1949 
22. World Wars: 
(i) 1st and 2nd World Wars as Total Wars: Societal implications 
(ii) World War I: Causes and consequences 
(iii) World War II: Causes and consequence 
23. The World after World War II: 
(i) Emergence of two power blocs 
(ii) Emergence of Third World and non-alignment 
(iii) UNO and the global disputes. 
24. Liberation from Colonial Rule: 
(i) Latin America-Bolivar 
(ii) Arab World-Egypt 
(iii) Africa-Apartheid to Democracy 
(iv) South-East Asia-Vietnam 
25. Decolonization and Underdevelopment: 
(i) Factors constraining development: Latin America, Africa 
26. Unification of Europe: 
(i) Post War Foundations: NATO and European Community 
(ii) Consolidation and Expansion of European Community 
(iii) European Union. 
27. Disintegration of Soviet Union and the Rise of the Unipolar World: 
(i) Factors leading to the collapse of Soviet communism and the Soviet Union, 1985-1991 
(ii) Political Changes in Eastern Europe 1989-2001. 
(iii) End of the cold war and US ascendancy in the World as the lone superpower. 
 
LAW 
PAPER - I 
Constitutional and Administrative Law 
1. Constitution and Constitutionalism: The distinctive features of the Constitution. 
2. Fundamental rights – Public interest litigation; Legal Aid; Legal services authority. 
3. Relationship between fundamental rights, directive principles and fundamental duties. 
4. Constitutional position of the President and relation with the Council of Ministers. 
5. Governor and his powers. 
6. Supreme Court and High Courts: 
(a) Appointments and transfer. 
(b) Powers, functions and jurisdiction. 
7. Centre, States and local bodies: 
--- PAGE 30 ---
(a) Distribution of legislative powers between the Union and the States. 
(b) Local bodies. 
(c) Administrative relationship among Union, State and Local Bodies. 
(d) Eminent domain – State property – common property – community property. 
8. Legislative powers, privileges and immunities. 
9. Services under the Union and the States: 
(a) Recruitment and conditions of services; Constitutional safeguards; Administrative tribunals. 
(b) Union Public Service Commission and State Public Service Commissions – Power and functions 
(c) Election Commission – Power and functions. 
10. Emergency provisions. 
11. Amendment of the Constitution. 
12. Principles of natural justice – Emerging trends and judicial approach. 
13. Delegated legislation and its constitutionality. 
14. Separation of powers and constitutional governance. 
15. Judicial review of administrative action. 
16. Ombudsman: Lokayukta, Lokpal etc.  
International Law 
1. Nature and definition of international law. 
2. Relationship between international law and municipal law. 
3. State recognition and state succession. 
4. Law of the sea: Inland waters, territorial sea, con tiguous zone, continental shel f, exclusive economic zone, 
high seas. 
 
5. Individuals: Nationality, statelessness; Human rights and procedures available for their enforcement. 
6. Territorial jurisdiction of States, extradition and asylum. 
7. Treaties: Formation, application, termination and reservation.  
8. United Nations: Its principal organs, powers, functions and reform. 
9. Peaceful settlement of disputes – different modes. 
10. Lawful recourse to force: aggression, self-defence, intervention. 
11. Fundamental principles of international humanitarian law – International conventions and contemporary 
     developments. 
12. Legality of the use of nuclear weapons; ban on test ing of nuclear weapons; Nuclear – non proliferation 
treaty, CTBT. 
13. International terrorism, state sponsored terrorism, hijacking, international criminal court. 
14. New international economic order and monetary law: WTO, TRIPS, GATT, IMF, World Bank. 
15. Protection and improvement of the human environment: International efforts. 
PAPER - II 
Law of Crimes 
1. General principles of criminal liability: Mens rea and actus reus, mens rea in statutory offences. 
2. Kinds of punishment and emerging trends as to abolition of capital punishment. 
3. Preparation and criminal attempt. 
4. General exceptions. 
5. Joint and constructive liability. 
6. Abetment. 
7. Criminal conspiracy. 
8. Offences against the State. 
9. Offences against public tranquility. 
10. Offences against human body. 
11. Offences against property. 
12. Offences against women. 
13. Defamation. 
14. Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988. 
15. Protection of Civil Rights Act 1955 and subsequent legislative developments. 
16. Plea bargaining. 
Law of Torts 
1. Nature and definition. 
--- PAGE 31 ---
2. Liability based upon fault and strict liability; Absolute liability. 
3. Vicarious liability including State liability. 
4. General defences. 
5. Joint tort feasors. 
6. Remedies. 
7. Negligence. 
8. Defamation. 
9. Nuisance. 
10. Conspiracy. 
11. False imprisonment. 
12. Malicious prosecution. 
13. Consumer Protection Act, 1986. 
Law of Contracts and Mercantile Law 
1. Nature and formation of contract/Econtract. 
2. Factors vitiating free consent. 
3. Void, voidable, illegal and unenforceable agreements. 
4. Performance and discharge of contracts. 
5. Quasi- Contracts. 
6. Consequences of breach of contract. 
7. Contract of indemnity, guarantee and insurance. 
8. Contract of agency. 
9. Sale of goods and hire purchase. 
10. Formation and dissolution of partnership. 
11. Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881. 
12. Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996. 
13. Standard form contracts. 
Contemporary Legal Developments 
1. Public Interest Litigation. 
2. Intellectual property rights – Concept, types/prospects. 
3. Information Technology Law including Cyber Laws – Concept, purpose/prospects. 
4. Competition Law- Concept, purpose/prospects. 
5. Alternate Dispute Resolution – Concept, types/prospects. 
6. Major statutes concerning environmental law. 
7. Right to Information Act. 
8. Trial by media. 
Literature of the following languages 
NOTE (i) : A candidate may be required to answer some or all the questions in the language concerned. 
NOTE (ii) : In regard to the languages included in the Eighth Schedule to Constitution, the scripts will 
be the same as indicated in Section-II (B) of Appendix I relating to Main Examination. 
 
NOTE (iii) : Candidates should note  that the questions not required  to be answered in a specific 
language will have to be answered in the language medium indicated by them for answering papers on 
Essay, General Studies and Optional Subjects. 
 
  
ASSAMESE 
PAPER-I 
(Answers must be written in Assamese) 
Section-A 
Language 
(a) History of the origin and development of the Assamese language-its position among the Indo-Aryan    
Languages - periods in its history. 
 
(b)  Developments of Assamese prose. 
(c) Vowels and consonants of the Assamese languages-rules of phonetic changes with stress on Assamese 
     coming down from Old Indo-Aryan.  
 
(d) Assamese vocabulary-and its sources. 
--- PAGE 32 ---
(e) Morphology of the language-conjugation-enclitic definitives and pleonastic suffixes. 
(f) Dilectical divergences-the standard colloquial and the Kamrupi dialect in particulars. 
(g) Assamese scripts-its evolution through the ages till 19th century A.D. 
 
Section-B 
Literary Criticism and Literary History 
(a) Principles of Literary criticism upto New criticism. 
(b) Different literary genres. 
(c) Development of literary forms in Assamese. 
(d) Development of literary criticism in Assamese. 
(e) Periods of the literary history of Assam from the earliest beginnings, i.e. from the period of the 
charyyageets with their socio-cultural background : the proto Assamese-Pre-Sankaradeva - Sankaradeva-post 
Sankaradeva – Modern period (from the coming of the Britishers)-Post-Independence period. Special 
emphasis is to be given on the Vaisnavite period, the gonaki and the post-Independence period.  
 
PAPER-II 
This paper will require first-hand reading of the texts prescribed and will be designed to test the 
candidates’ critical ability.  
 
[Answers must be written in Assamese] 
Section-A 
Rãmãyana (Ayodhya Kãnda only)  -  by Madhava Kandali. 
Pãrijãt-Harana   - by Sankaradeva. 
Rãsakrïdã   - by Sankaradeva (From Kirtana Ghosa). 
Bargeet    - by Madhavadeva 
Rãjasûya   - by Madhavadeva. 
Kãthã-Bhãgavata (Books I and II) - by Baikunthanath Bhattacharyya. 
Gurucarit-Kathã (Sankaradeva’s      - ed. by Maheswar Neog 
Part only)  
Section-B 
Mor Jeevan Soñwaran  - by Lakshminath Bezbaroa. 
Kripãbar Barbaruãr Kãkatar Topola - by Lakshminath Bezbaroa. 
Pratimã    - by Chandra Kumar Agarwalla. 
Gãoñburhã   - by Padmanath Gohain Barua. 
Monamatî   - by Rajanikanta Bordoloi. 
Purani Asamîyã Sãhitya  - by Banikanta Kakati. 
Kãrengar Ligirî   - by Jyotiprasad Agarwalla 
Jeevanar Bãtat   - by Bina Barwa (Birinchi Kumar Barua) 
Mrityunjoy   - by Birendrakumar Bhattacharyya 
Samrãt    - by Navakanta Barua. 
 
BENGALI 
PAPER-I 
History of Language and Literature. 
Answers must be written in Bengali. 
Section-A   
Topics from the History of Bangla language 
1. The chronological track from Proto Indo-European to Bangla (Family tree with branches and approximate    
dates). 
2. Historical stages of Bangla (Old, Middle, New) and their linguistic features.  
3. Dialects of Bangla and their distinguishing characteristics. 
4. Elements of Bangla Vocabulary. 
5. Forms of Bangla Literary Prose-Sadhu and Chalit. 
6. Processes of language change relevant for Bangla :  
   Apinihiti (Anaptyxis), Abhishruti (umlaut), Murdhanyibhavan (cerebralization), Nasikyibhavan 
(Nasalization), 
   Samibhavan (Assimilation), Sadrishya (Analogy), Svaragama (Vowel insertion)-Adi Svaragama, Madhya        
Svaragama or Svarabhakti, Antya Svaragama, Svarasangati (Vowel hormony), y-shruti and w-shruti. 
 
7. Problems of standardization and reform of alphabet and spelling, and those of transliteration and   
Romanization. 
 
8. Phonology, Morphology and Syntax of Modern Bangla. 
   (Sounds of Modern Bangla, Conjuncts; word formations, compounds; basic sentence patterns.) 
Section-B 
Topics from the History of Bangla Literature. 
1. Periodization of Bangla Literature : Old Bangla and Middle Bangla. 
--- PAGE 33 ---
2. Points of difference between modern and pre-modern Bangla Literature. 
3. Roots and reasons behind the emergence of modernity in Bangla Literature. 
4. Evolution of various Middle Bangla forms : Ma ngal kavyas, Vaishnava lyrics, Adapted narratives 
(Ramayana, 
    Mahabharata, Bhagavata) and religious biographies. 
 
5. Secular forms in middle Bangla literature. 
6. Narrative and lyric trends in the nineteenth century Bangla poetry. 
7. Development of prose. 
8. Bangla dramatic literature (nineteenth century, Tagore, Post-1944 Bangla drama). 
9. Tagore and post-Tagoreans. 
10. Fiction, major authors :  
     (Bankimchandra, Tagore, Saratchandra, Bibhutibusan, Tarasankar, Manik). 
11. Women and Bangla literature : creators and created. 
 
PAPER-II 
Prescribed texts for close study. 
Answers must be written in Bengali. 
Section-A 
1. Vaishnava Padavali (Calcutta University)  
    Poems of Vidyapati, Chandidas, Jnanadas, Govindadas and Balaramdas. 
 
2. Chandimangal Kalketu episode by Mukunda (Sahitya Akademi). 
3. Chaitanya Charitamrita Madya Lila, by Krishnadas Kaviraj (Sahitya Akademi). 
4. Meghnadbadh Kavya by Madhusudan Dutta. 
5. Kapalkundala by Bankimchandra Chattarjee. 
6. Samya and Bangadesher Krishak by Bankimchandra Chatterjee. 
7. Sonar Tari by Rabindranath Tagore. 
8. Chhinnapatravali by Rabindranath Tagore. 
Section-B 
9. Raktakarabi by Rabindranath Tagore. 
10. Nabajatak by Rabindranath Tagore. 
11. Grihadaha by Saratchandra Chatterjee. 
12. Prabandha Samgraha Vol. 1, by Pramatha Choudhuri. 
13. Aranyak by Bibhutibhusan Banerjee 
14. Short stories  by Manik Bandyopadhyay : Atashi Mami, Pragaitihasik, Holud-Pora, Sarisrip, Haraner 
Natjamai, Chhoto-Bokulpurer Jatri, Kustharogir Bou, Jakey Ghush Ditey Hoy. 
 
15. Shrestha Kavita by Jibanananda Das. 
16. Jagori by Satinath Bhaduri. 
17. Ebam Indrajit by Badal Sircar. 
BODO 
PAPER-I 
History of Bodo Language and Literature 
(Answers must be written in Bodo) 
Section-A 
History of Bodo Language 
1. Homeland, language family, its present status and its mutual contact with Assamese. 
2. (a) Phonemes : Vowel and Consonant Phonemes 
    (b) Tones. 
 
3. Morphology : Gender, Case & Case endings, Plural suffix, Definitives, Verbal suffix. 
4. Vocabulary and its sources. 
5. Syntax : Types of sentences, Word Order. 
6. History of Scripts used in writing Bodo Language since inception. 
 
Section-B 
History of Bodo Literature 
1. General introduction of Bodo folk literature. 
2. Contribution of the Missionaries. 
--- PAGE 34 ---
3. Periodization of Bodo Literature. 
4. Critical analysis of different genre (Poetry, Novel, Short Story and Drama) 
5. Translation Literature. 
 
Paper-II 
The Paper will require first-hand read ing of the texts prescribed and will be designed to test the critical 
ability of the candidates. 
 
(Answers must be written in Bodo) 
Section-A 
(a) Khonthai-Methai  (Edited by Madaram Brahma & Rupnath Brahma). 
(b) Hathorkhi-Hala (Edited by Pramod Chandra Brahma) 
(c) Boroni Gudi Sibsa Arw Aroz : Madaram Brahma. 
(d) Raja Nilambar : Dwarendra Nath Basumatary. 
(e) Bibar (Prose section) (Edited by Satish Chandra Basumatary) 
Section-B 
(a) Gibi Bithai (Aida Nwi) : Bihuram Boro 
(b) Radab : Samar Brahma Chaudhury 
(c) Okhrang Gongse Nangou : Brajendra Kumar Brahma 
(d) Baisagu Arw Harimu : Laksheswar Brahma. 
(e) Gwdan Boro : Manoranjan Lahary 
(f) Jujaini Or : Chittaranjan Muchahary 
(g) Mwihoor : Dharanidhar Wary 
(h) Hor Badi Khwmsi : Kamal Kumar Brahma 
(i) Jaolia Dewan : Mangal Singh Hozowary 
(j) Hagra Guduni Mwi : Nilkamal Brahma. 
  
DOGRI 
PAPER-I 
History of Dogri Language and Literature 
(Answers must be written in Dogri) 
Section-A 
History of Dogri Language 
1. Dogri language : Origin and development through different stages. 
2. Linguistic boundaries of Dogri and its dialects. 
3. Characteristic features of Dogri language. 
4. Structure of Dogri Language : 
 (a) Sound Structure :  
 Segmental : Vowels and Consonants Non-Segmental : Length, Stress, Nasalization, Tone and Juncture. 
    (b) Morphology of Dogri :  
 (i)  Inflection Categories : Gender, Number, Case, Person, Tense and Voice. 
 (ii)  Word Formation : use of  prefixes, infixes and suffixes. 
 (iii)   Vocabulary : Tatsam, tadbhav, foreign and regional. 
 (c) Sentence Structure: Major Sentence - types and their constituents, agreement and concord in Dogri 
syntax. 
5. Dogri Language and Scripts : Dogre/Dogra Akkhar, Devanagari and Persian. 
Section-B 
History of Dogri Literature : 
1. A brief account of Pre-independence Dogri Literature : Poetry & Prose. 
2. Development of modern Dogri Poetry and main trends in Dogri Poetry. 
3. Development of Dogri short-story, main trends & prominent short-story writers. 
4. Development of Dogri Novel, main trends & contribution of Dogri Novelists. 
5. Development of Dogri Drama & contribution of prominent Playwrights. 
6. Development of Dogri Prose : Essays, Memoirs & Travelogues. 
7. An introduction to Dogri Folk literature - Folk songs, Folk tales & Ballads. 
--- PAGE 35 ---
Paper-II 
Textual Cristisim of Dogri Literature 
(Answers must be written in Dogri) 
Section-A 
Poetry 
1. Azadi Paihle Di Dogri Kavita. 
   The following poets : 
   Devi Ditta, Lakkhu, Ganga Ram, Ramdhan, Hardutt, Pahari Gandhi Baba Kanshi Ram & Permanand Almast. 
2. Modern Dogri Poetry 
   Azadi Bad Di Dogri Kavita  
  The following poets : 
   Kishan Smailpuri, Tara Smailpuri, Mohan Lal Sa polia, Yash Sharma, K.S. Madhukar, Padma Sachdev,   
Jitendra Udhampuri, Charan Singh and Prakash Premi. 
 
3. Sheeraza Dogri Number 102, Ghazal Ank. 
   The following poets : 
   Ram Lal Sharma, Ved Pal Deep, N.D. Jamwal, Shiv Ram Deep, Ashwini Magotra and Virendra Kesar. 
4. Sheeraza Dogri Number 147, Ghazal Ank 
   The following poets : 
   R.N. Shastri, Jitendra Udhampuri, Champa Sharma and Darshan Darshi.  
5. Ramayan (Epic) by Shambhu Nath Sharma (upto Ayodhya Kand) 
6. Veer Gulab (Khand Kavya) by Dinoo Bhai Pant. 
Section-B 
Prose 
1. Ajakani Dogri Kahani 
   The following short story writers : 
   Madan Mohan Sharma, Narendra Khajuria and B.P. Sathe. 
2. Ajakani Dogri Kahani Part-II 
   The following Short Story writters : 
   Ved Rahi, Narsingh Dev Jamwal, Om Goswami, Chhattrapal, Lalit Magotra, Chaman Arora and Ratan 
Kesar. 
3. Khatha Kunj Bhag II 
   The following Story writters : 
   Om Vidyarthi, Champa Sharma and Krishan Sharma 
4. Meel Patthar (collection of short stories) by Bandhu Sharma 
5. Kaiddi (Novel) by Desh Bandhu Dogra Nutan 
6. Nanga Rukkh (Novel) by O.P. Sharma Sarathi. 
7. Nayaan (Drama) by Mohan Singh. 
8. Satrang (A collection of one act plays)  
   The following pay wrights : 
   Vishwa Nath Khajuria, Ram Nath Shastri, Jitendra Sharma, Lalit Magotra and Madan Mohan Sharma. 
9. Dogri Lalit Nibandh 
   The following authors : 
   Vishwa Nath Khajuria, Narayan Mishra, Balkrishan Shastri, Shiv Nath, Shyam Lal Sharma, Lakshmi 
Narayan, 
   D.C. Prashant, Ved Ghai, Kunwar Viyogi. 
 
 
 
ENGLISH 
The syllabus consists of two papers, designed to test a first-hand and critical reading of texts prescribed from 
the following periods in English Literature: Paper I: 1600-1900 and Paper II : 1900-1990. 
 
There will be two compulsory questions  in each paper : a) A short-notes question related to the topics for 
general study, and b) A critical analysis of UNSEEN passages both in prose and verse. 
 
PAPER-I 
Answers must be written in English. 
--- PAGE 36 ---
Texts for detailed study are listed below.  
Candidates will also be required to show adequate knowledge of the following topics and movements : 
The Renaissance : Elizabethan and Jacobean Drama; Me taphysical Poetry; The Epic and the Mock-epic; Neo-
classicism; Satire; The Romantic Movement; The Rise of the Novel; The Victorian Age.  
 
Section-A 
1. William Shakespeare : King Lear and The Tempest. 
2. John Donne. The following poems : 
- Canonization; 
- Death be not proud; 
- The Good Morrow; 
- On his Mistress going to bed; 
- The Relic; 
3. John Milton : Paradise Lost, I, II, IV, IX 
4. Alexander Pope. The Rape of the Lock. 
5. William Wordsworth. The following poems: 
- Ode on Intimations of Immortality. 
- Tintern Abbey. 
- Three years she grew. 
- She dwelt among untrodden ways. 
- Michael. 
- Resolution and Independence. 
- The World is too much with us. 
- Milton, thou shouldst be living at this hour. 
- Upon Westminster Bridge. 
6. Alfred Tennyson : In Memoriam. 
7. Henrik Ibsen : A Doll’s House. 
Section-B 
1. Jonathan Swift. Gulliver’s Travels. 
2. Jane Austen. Pride and Prejudice. 
3. Henry Fielding. Tom Jones. 
4. Charles Dickens. Hard Times. 
5. George Eliot. The Mill on the Floss. 
6. Thomas Hardy. Tess of the d’Urbervilles. 
7. Mark Twain. The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn. 
PAPER-II 
Answers must be written in English. 
Texts for detailed study are listed below. 
Candidates will also be required to show adequate knowledge of the following topics and movements : 
Modernism; Poets of the Thirties; The stream-of-consciousness Novel; Absurd Drama; Colonialism and Post-
Colonialism; Indian Writing in English; Marxist, Psychoa nalytical and Feminist approaches to literature; Post-
Modernism. 
 
Section-A 
1. William Butler Yeats. The following poems: 
- Easter 1916 
- The Second Coming 
- A Prayer for my daughter. 
- Sailing to Byzantium. 
- The Tower. 
- Among School Children. 
- Leda and the Swan. 
- Meru 
- Lapis Lazuli 
- The Second Coming 
- Byzantium. 
--- PAGE 37 ---
2. T.S. Eliot. The following poems : 
- The Love Song of J.Alfred Prufrock 
- Journey of the Magi. 
- Burnt Norton. 
3. W.H. Auden. The following poems : 
- Partition 
- Musee des Beaux Arts 
- in Memory of W.B. Yeats 
- Lay your sleeping head, my love 
- The Unknown Citizen 
- Consider 
- Mundus Et Infans 
- The Shield of Achilles 
- September 1, 1939 
- Petition. 
4. John Osborne : Look Back in Anger. 
5. Samuel Beckett. Waiting for Godot. 
6. Philip Larkin. The following poems : 
- Next 
- Please 
- Deceptions 
- Afternoons 
- Days 
- Mr. Bleaney 
7. A.K. Ramanujan. The following poems : 
- Looking for a Causim on a Swing 
- A River 
- Of Mothers, among other Things 
- Love Poem for a Wife 1 
- Small-Scale Reflections on a Great House 
- Obituary 
(All these poems are available in the anthology Ten Twentieth Century Indian Poets, edited by R. Parthasarthy, 
published by Oxford University Press, New Delhi). 
 
Section-B 
1. Joseph Conrad. Lord Jim. 
2. James Joyce. Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man. 
3. D.H. Lawrence. Sons and Lovers. 
4. E.M. Forster. A Passage to India. 
5. Virginia Woolf. Mrs Dalloway. 
6. Raja Rao. Kanthapura. 
7. V.S. Naipal. A House for Mr. Biswas. 
 
  
GUJARATI 
PAPER-I 
(Answers must be written in Gujarati) 
Section-A 
Gujarati Language : Form and history 
1. History of Gujarati Language with special reference to New Indo-Aryan i.e. last one thousand years. 
2. Significant features of the Gujarati language: Phonology, morphology and syntax. 
3. Major dialects: Surti, Pattani, charotari and Saurashtri. 
History of Gujarati Literature  
Medieval : 
4. Jaina tradition 
--- PAGE 38 ---
5. Bhakti tradition: Sagun and Nirgun (Jnanmargi) 
6. Non-sectarian tradition (Laukik parampara)  
Modern: 
7. Sudharak yug 
8. Pandit yug 
9. Gandhi yug 
10. Anu-Gandhi yug 
11. Adhunik yug 
Section-B 
Literary Forms : (Salient features, history and development of the following literary forms): 
(a) Medieval 
1. Narratives: Rasa, Akhyan and Padyavarta 
2. Lyrical: Pada 
(b) Folk 
3. Bhavai 
(c) Modern 
4. Fiction: Novel and short story 
5. Drama 
6. Literary Essay 
7. Lyrical Poetry 
(d) Criticism 
8. History of theoretical Gujarati criticism 
9. Recent research in folk tradition. 
PAPER-II 
(Answers must be written in Gujarati) 
The paper will require first hand reading of the texts pres cribed and will be designed to test the critical ability 
of the candidate. 
 
 
Section-A 
1. Medieval 
(i) Vasantvilas phagu-AJNATKRUT 
(ii) Kadambari-BHALAN 
(iii) Sudamacharitra-PREMANAND 
(iv) Chandrachandravatini varta-SHAMAL 
(v) Akhegeeta-AKHO 
2. Sudharakyug & Pandityug 
(vi) Mari Hakikat-NARMADASHANKAR DAVE 
(vii) Farbasveerah- DALPATRAM 
(viii)Saraswatichandra-Part-I GOVARDHANRAM TRIPATHI 
(ix) Purvalap- 'KANT' (MANISHANKAR RATNAJI BHATT) 
(x) Raino Parvat-RAMANBHAI NEELKANTH 
Section-B 
1. Gandhiyug & Anu Gandhiyug 
(i) Hind Swaraj-MOHANDAS KARMACHAND GANDHI 
(ii) Patanni Prabhuta- KANHAIYALAL MUNSHI 
(iii) Kavyani Shakti- RAMNARAYAN VISH-WANATH PATHAK 
(iv) Saurashtrani Rasdhar Part 1- ZAVERCHAND MEGHANI 
(v) Manvini Bhavai-PANNALAL PATEL  
(vi) Dhvani-RAJENDRA SHAH 
2. Adhunik yug 
(vii) Saptapadi-UMASHANKAR JOSHI 
(viii)Janantike- SURESH JOSHI 
(ix) Ashwatthama- SITANSHU YASHASCHANDRA 
 
--- PAGE 39 ---
 
HINDI 
PAPER-I 
(Answers must be written in Hindi) 
Section-A 
1. History of Hindi Language and Nagari Lipi. 
I. Grammatical and applied forms of Apbhransh, Awahatta & Arambhik Hindi. 
II. Development of Braj and Awadhi as literary language during medieval period. 
III. Early form of Khari-boli in Siddha-Nath Sahitya, Khusero, Sant Sahitaya, Rahim etc. and Dakhni Hindi. 
IV. Development of Khari-boli and Nagari Lipi during 19th Century. 
V. Standardisation of Hindi Bhasha & Nagari Lipi. 
VI. Development of Hindi as national Language during freedom movement. 
VII. The development of Hindi as a National Language of Union of India. 
VIII. Scientific & Technical development of Hindi Language. 
IX. Prominent dialects of Hindi and their inter- relationship. 
X. Salient features of Nagari Lipi and the efforts for its reform & Standard form of Hindi. 
XI. Grammatical structure of Standard Hindi. 
Section-B 
2. History of Hindi Literature. 
I. The relevance and importance of Hindi literature and tradition of writing History of Hindi Literature. 
II. Literary trends of the following four periods of history of Hindi Literature. 
A. Adikal-Sidh, Nath and Raso Sahitya.  
 Prominent poets - Chandvardai, Khusaro, Hemchandra, Vidyapati. 
B. Bhaktikal - Sant Kavyadhara, Sufi Kavyadhara, Krishna Bhaktidhara and Ram Bhaktidhara. 
    Prominent Poets - Kabir, Jayasi, Sur & Tulsi. 
C. Ritikal-Ritikavya, Ritibaddhakavya & Riti Mukta Kavya. 
    Prominent Poets-Keshav, Bihari, Padmakar and Ghananand. 
D. Adhunik Kal 
a. Renaissance, the development of Prose, Bharatendu Mandal. 
b. Prominent Writers : Bharatendu, Bal Krishna Bhatt & Pratap Narain Mishra. 
c. Prominent trends of modern Hindi Poetry : Chhayavad, Pragativad, Proyogvad, Nai Kavita, Navgeet and 
Contemporary poetry and Janvadi Kavita. 
 
Prominent Poets : Maithili Sharan Gupta, Prasad, Nirala, Mahadevi, Dinkar, Agyeya, Muktibodh, Nagarjun. 
III. Katha Sahitya 
A. Upanyas & Realism 
B. The origin and development of Hindi Novels. 
C. Prominent Novelists : Premchand, Jainendra, Yashpal, Renu and Bhism Sahani. 
D. The origin and development of Hindi short story. 
E. Prominent short Story Writers : Premchand, Prasad, Agyeya, Mohan Rakesh & Krishna Shobti. 
IV. Drama & Theatre 
A. The origin & Development of Hindi Drama. 
B. Prominent Dramatists : Bharatendu, Prasad, Jagdish Chandra Mathur, Ram Kumar Verma, Mohan Rakesh. 
C. The development of Hindi Theatre. 
V. Criticism 
A. The origin and development of Hindi criticism : Sai ddhantik, Vyavharik, Pragativadi, Manovishleshanvadi 
&      Nai Alochana. 
 
B. Prominent critics : Ramchandra Shukla, Hajari Prasad Dwivedi, Ram Vilas Sharma & Nagendra. 
VI. The other forms of Hindi prose-Lalit Nibandh, Rekhachitra, Sansmaran, Yatravrittant. 
PAPER-II 
(Answers must be written in Hindi) 
This paper will require first hand reading of prescribed texts and will test the critical ability of the candidates. 
Section-A 
1. Kabir : Kabir Granthawali, Ed, Shyam Sundar Das (First hundred Sakhis.) 
2. Surdas : Bhramar Gitsar, Ed. Ramchandra Shukla (First hundred Padas) 
--- PAGE 40 ---
3. Tulsidas : Ramchrit Manas (Sundar Kand) Kavitawali (Uttar Kand). 
4. Jayasi : Padmawat Ed. Shyam Sundar Das (Sinhal Dwip Khand & Nagmativiyog Khand) 
5. Bihari : Bihari Ratnakar Ed. Jagnnath Prasad Ratnakar (First 100 Dohas) 
6. Maithili : Bharat Bharati Sharan Gupta  
7. Prasad : Kamayani (Chinta and Sharddha Sarg) 
8. Nirala : Rag-Virag, Ed. Ram Vilas Sharma (Ram Ki Shakti Puja & Kukurmutta). 
9. Dinkar : Kurushetra 10. Agyeya : Angan Ke Par Dwar (Asadhya Vina) 
11. Muktiboth: Brahma Rakshas  
12. Nagarjun: Badal Ko Ghirte Dekha Hai, Akal Ke Bad, Harijan Gatha. 
Section-B 
1. Bharatendu : Bharat Durdasha 
2. Mohan Rakesh : Ashad Ka Ek Din 
3. Ramchandra Shukla : Chintamani (Part I)  
                                       (Kavita Kya Hai] Shraddha Aur Bhakti) 
4. Dr. Satyendra : Nibandh Nilaya-Bal Krishna Bhatt,  Premchand, Gulab Rai, Hajari Prasad Dwivedi, Ram 
Vilas   Sharma, Agyeya, Kuber Nath Rai. 
 
5. Premchand : Godan, Premchand ki Sarvashreshtha Kahaniyan, Ed. Amrit Rai/Manjusha - Prem Chand ki 
Sarvashreshtha Kahaniyan, Ed. Amrit Rai. 
6. Prasad : Skandgupta  
7. Yashpal : Divya 
8. Phaniswar Nath Renu : Maila Anchal  
9. Mannu Bhandari : Mahabhoj 
10. Rajendra Yadav : Ek Dunia Samanantar (All Stories) 
KANNADA 
PAPER-I 
(Answers must be written in Kannada) 
Section-A 
A. History of Kannada Language 
What is Language?  General charecteristics of Language. Dravidian Family of Languages and its specific 
features, Antiquity of Kannada Language, Different Phases of its Development.  
Dialects of Kannada Language : Regional and Social Various aspects of development of Kannada Language : 
phonological and Semantic changes. 
Language borrowing. 
B. History of Kannada Literature 
Ancient Kannada literature : Influence and Trends. Poets for study : Specified poets from Pampa to Ratnakara 
Varni are to be studied in the light of contents, form and expression : Pampa, Janna, Nagachandra. 
Medieval Kannada literature : Influence and Trends. 
Vachana literature : Basavanna, Akka Mahadevi. 
Medieval Poets : Harihara, Ragha-vanka, Kumar-Vyasa. 
Dasa literature : Purandra and Kanaka.  
Sangataya : Ratnakaravarni  
C. Modern Kannada literature : 
Influence, trends and idealogies, Navodaya, Pragatishila, Navya, Dalita and Bandaya. 
Section-B 
A. Poetics and literary criticism :  
    Definition and concepts of poetry : Word, Meaning, Alankara, Reeti, Rasa, Dhwani, Auchitya. 
    Interpretations of Rasa Sutra. 
    Modern Trends of literary criticism : Formalist, Historical, Marxist, Feminist, Post-colonial criticism. 
B. Cultural History of Karnataka 
Contribution of Dynasties to the culture of Karnataka : Chalukyas of Badami and Kalyani, Rashtrakutas, 
Hoysalas, Vijayanagara rulers, in literary context. 
 
Major religions of Karnataka and their cultural contributions. 
Arts of Karnataka : Sculpture, Architecture, Painting, Music, Dance-in the literary context. 
Unification of Karnataka and its impact on Kannada literature. 
PAPER-II 
--- PAGE 41 ---
(Answers must be written in Kannada) 
The paper will require first-hand reading of the Texts pres cribed and will be designed to test the critical ability 
of the candidates. 
 
Section-A 
A. OLD KANNADA LITERATURE 
1. Vikramaarjuna Vijaya of Pampa (cantos 12 & 13), (Mysore University Pub.) 
2. Vaddaraadhane (Sukumaraswamyia Kathe, Vidyutchorana Kathe) 
B. MEDIEVAL KANNADA LITERATURE : 
1. Vachana Kammata, Ed: K. Marulasiddappa K.R. Nagaraj (Bangalore University Pub.) 
2. Janapriya Kanakasamputa, Ed. D. Javare Gowda (Kannada and Culture Directorate, Bangalore) 
3. Nambiyannana Ragale, Ed., T.N. Sreekantaiah (Ta.Vem. Smaraka Grantha Male, Mysore) 
4. Kumaravyasa Bharata : Karna Parva (Mysore University) 
5. Bharatesha Vaibhava Sangraha Ed. Ta. Su. Shama Rao (Mysore University) 
Section-B 
A. MODERN KANNADA LITERATURE 
1. Poetry : Hosagannada Kavite, Ed : G.H. Nayak (Kannada Saahitya Parishattu, Bangalore) 
2. Novel : Bettada Jeeva-Shivarama Karanta Madhavi-Arupama Niranjana Odalaala-Devanuru Mahadeva 
3. Short Story : Kannada Sanna Kathegalu, Ed. G.H. Nayak (Sahitya Academy, New Delhi). 
4. Drama : Shudra Tapaswi-Kuvempu. Tughlak-Girish Karnad. 
5. Vichara Saahitya : Devaru-A.N. Moorty Rao (Pub : D.V.K. Moorty, Mysore.) 
B. FOLK LITERATURE : 
1. Janapada Swaroopa-Dr. H.M. Nayak. (Ta. Vem. Smaraka Grantha Male, Mysore.) 
2. Janapada Geetaanjali-Ed.D. Javare Gowda. (Pub : Sahitya Academy, New Delhi.) 
3. Kannada Janapada Kathegalu-Ed. J.S. Paramashivaiah, (Mysore University.) 
4. Beedi Makkalu Beledo. Ed. Kalegowda Nagavara (Pub : Bangalore University.) 
5. Savirada Ogatugalu-Ed : S.G. Imrapura. 
KASHMIRI 
PAPER-I 
(Answers must be written in Kashmiri) 
Section-A 
1. Genealogical relationship of the Kashmiri language: various theories. 
2. Areas of occurrence and dialects (geographical/social) 
3. Phonology and grammar: 
i. Vowel and consonant system; 
ii. Nouns and pronouns with various case inflections; 
iii. Verbs: various types and tenses. 
4. Syntactic structure: 
i. Simple, active and declarative statments; 
ii. Coordination; 
iii. Relativisation. 
Section-B 
1. Kashmiri literature in the 14th century (Socio-cultura l and intellectual background with special reference to 
Lal 
Dyad and Sheikhul Alam)  
 
2. Nineteenth century Kashmiri literature (development of various genres: vatsun; ghazal; and mathnavi). 
3. Kashmiri literature in the first half of the twentie th century (with special refe rence to Mahjoor and Azad; 
various literary influences). 
 
4. Modern Kashmiri literature (with special refernece to  the development of the short story, drama, novel and 
nazm). 
 
PAPER-II 
(Answers must be written in Kashmiri) 
Section-A 
1. Intensive study of Kashmiri poetry upto the nineteenth century: 
i) Lal Dyad 
--- PAGE 42 ---
ii) Sheikhul Aalam 
iii) Habba Khatoon 
2. Kashmiri poetry: 19th Century 
i) Mahmood Gami (Vatsans) 
ii) Maqbool Shah (Gulrez) 
iii) Rasool Mir (Ghazals) 
iv) Abdul Ahad Nadim (N'at) 
v) Krishanjoo Razdan (Shiv Lagun) 
vi) Sufi Poets (Text in Sanglaab, published by the Deptt. of Kashmiri, University of Kashmir) 
3. Twentieth Century Kashmiri poetry (text in Azich Kashir Shairi, published by the Deptt. of Kashmiri, 
University of Kashmir) 
 
4. Literary criticism and research work: development and various trends. 
Section-B 
1. An analytical study of the short story in Kashmiri. 
i) Afsana Majmu'a, published by the Deptt. of Kashmiri, University of Kashmir. 
ii) Kashur Afsana Az, published by the Sahitya Akademi 
iii) Hamasar Kashur Afsana, published by the Sahitya Akademi. 
The following short story writers only: 
Akhtar Mohi-ud-Din, Kamil, Hari Krishan Kaul, Hraday Kaul Bharti, Bansi Nirdosh, Gulshan Majid. 
2. Novel in Kashmiri: 
i) Mujrim by G.N. Gowhar 
ii) Marun-Ivan Ilyichun, (Kashmiri version of Tolstoy's The Death of Ivan Iiyich (Published by Kashmiri 
Deptt). 
3. Drama in Kashmiri 
i) Natuk Kariv Band, by Hari Krishan Kaul 
ii) Qk Angy Natuk, ed. Motilal Keemu published by Sahitya Akademi. 
iii) Razi Oedipus, tr. Naji Munawar, published by Sahitya Akademi. 
4. Kashmiri Folk Literature: 
i) Kashur Luki Theatre by Mohammad Subhan Bhagat, published by Deptt. of Kashmiri, University of 
Kashmir. 
ii) Kashiry Luki Beeth (all volumes) published by the J & K Cultural Academy. 
KONKANI 
PAPER-I 
(Answers must be written in Konkani) 
Section-A 
History of the Konkani Language : 
(i) Origin and development of the language and influences on it. 
(ii) Major variants of Konkani and their linguistic features. 
(iii) Grammatical and lexicographic wo rk in Konkani, including a study of cases, adverbs, indeclinables and 
voices. 
 
(iv) Old Standard Konkani, new Standard and standardisation problems. 
Section-B: 
History of Konkani literature: 
Candidates would be expected to be wellacquainted with Konkani literature and its social and cultural 
background and consider the problems and issues arising out of them. 
 
(i) History of Konkani literature from its probable sour ce to the present times, with emphasis on its major 
works, writers and movements. 
 
(ii) Social and cultural background of the making of Konkani literature from time to time. 
(iii) Indian and Western influences on Konkani literature from the earliest to modern times. 
(iv) Modern literary trends in the various genres and regions including a study of Konkani folklore. 
PAPER-II 
(Answers must be written in Konkani) 
Textual Criticism of Konkani Literature 
--- PAGE 43 ---
The paper will be designed to test the canidate's critical  and analytical abilities. Candidates would be expected 
to be wellacquainted with Konkani Literature and required to have a first-hand reading of the following texts: 
 
Section-A 
Prose 
1. a) Konkani Mansagangotri (excluding poetry) ed. by Prof. Olivinho Gomes. 
    b) Old Konkani language and literature-the Portuguese Role. 
2. a) Otmo Denvcharak-a novel by A.V. da Cruz. 
    b) Vadoll ani Varem-A novel by Antonio Pereira. 
    c) Devache Kurpen-a novel by V J P Saldanha. 
3. a) Vajralikhani-Shenoy Goem-bab-An anthology-ed. by Shantaram Varde Valavalikar 
    b) Konkani Lalit Niband-Essays-ed. By Shyam Verenkar 
    c) Teen Dasakam-An lAnthology-ed. by Chandrakant Keni. 
4. a) Demand-Drama-by Pundalik Naik 
    b) Kadambini- A miscellany of modern Prose-ed. by Prof. OJF Gomes & Smt. P.S. Tadkodkar. 
    c) Ratha Tujeo Ghudieo-by Smt. Jayanti Naik. 
Section-B 
Poetry 
1. a) Ev ani Mori: Poetry by Eduardo Bruno de Souza. 
    b) Abravanchem Yadnyadan-by Luis Mascarenhas. 
2. a) Godde Ramayan-ed.by R.K. Rao 
    b) Ratnahar I &II-collection of poems ed. R.V. Pandit. 
3. a) Zayo Zuyo-poems-Manohar L. Sardessai. 
    b) Kanadi Mati Konkani Kavi-Anthology of Poems-ed. Pratap Naik. 
4. a) Adrushatache Kalle-Poems by Pandurang Bhangui. 
    b) Yaman-Poems by Madhav Borkar  
MAITHILI 
PAPER-I 
History of Maithili Language and its Literature 
(Answer to be written in Maithili) 
PART-A 
History of Maithili Language 
1. Place of Maithili in Indo-European language family. 
2. Origin and development of Maithili language. (Sanskrit, Prakrit, Avhatt, Maithili) 
3. Periodic division of Maithili Language. (Beginning, Middle era, Modern era) 
4. Maithili and its different dialects.  
5. Relationship between Maithili and other Eastern languages (Bengali, Assamese, Oriya). 
6. Origin and development of Tirhuta Script. 
7. Pronouns and Verbs in Maithili Language. 
PART-B 
History of Maithili Literature 
1. Background of Maithili Literature (Religious, economic, social, cultural). 
2. Periodic division of Maithili literature. 
3. Pre-Vidyapati Literature. 
4. Vidyapati and his tradition. 
5. Medieval Maithili Drama (Kirtaniya Natak, Ankai Nat, Maithili dramas written in Nepal). 
6. Maithili Folk Literature (Folk Tales, Folk Drama, Folk Stories, Folk Songs). 
7. Development of different literary forms in modern era. 
   (a) Prabandh-kavya 
   (b) Muktak-kavya 
   (c) Novel 
   (d) Short Story 
   (e) Drama 
   (f) Essay 
   (g) Criticism 
--- PAGE 44 ---
   (h) Memoirs 
   (i) Translation 
8. Development of Maithili Magazines and Journals. 
PAPER-II 
(Answers must be written in Maithili) 
The paper will require first-hand reading of the prescr ibed texts and will test the critical ability of the 
candidates. 
PART-A 
1. Vidyapati Geet-Shati-Publisher : Sahitya Akademi, New Delhi (Lyrics- 1 to 50) 
2. Govind Das Bhajanavali-Publisher : Maithili Academy, Patna (Lyrics - 1 to 25). 
3. Krishnajanm – Manbodh  
4. Mithilabhasha Ramayana – Chanda Jha (only Sunder-Kand) 
5. Rameshwar Charit Mithila Ramayan - Lal Das (only Bal-kand) 
6. Keechak-Vadh-Tantra Nath Jha. 
7. Datta-Vati-Surendra Jha 'Suman' (only 1st and 2nd Cantos). 
8. Chitra-Yatri  
9. Samakaleen Maithili Kavita – Publisher : Sahitaya Akademi, New Delhi. 
PART-B 
10. Varna Ratnakar - Jyotirishwar (only 2nd Kallol) 
11. Khattar Kakak Tarang - Hari Mohan Jha. 
12. Lorik-Vijaya-Manipadma 
13. Prithvi Putra-Lalit 
14. Bhaphait Chahak Jinagi-Sudhanshu 'Shekar' Choudhary. 
15. Kirti Rajkamlak-Publisher : Maithili Academy, Patna (First Ten Stories only). 
16. Katha-Sangrah-Publisher : Maithili Academy, Patna. 
MALAYALAM 
PAPER-I 
(Answers must be written in Malayalam 
Section-A 
Unit 1-Early phase of Malayalam Language: 
1.1 Various theories: origin from proto Dravidian, Tamil, Sanskrit. 
1.2 Relation between Tamil and Malayalam: Six nayas of A.R. Rajarajavarma. 
1.3 Pattu school-definition, Ramacharitam, later pattu works-Niranam works and Krishnagatha. 
Unit 2-Linguistic features of :  
2.1 Manipravalam-definition. Language of early mani pravala works-Champu, Sandesakavya, Chandrotsava, 
minor works. Later Manipravala works-medieval Champu and Attakkatha. 
 
2.2 Folklore-Southern and Northern ballads, Mappila songs. 
2.3 Early Malayalam prose-Bhashakautaliyam, Brahmandapuranam, Attaprakaram, Kramadipika and 
Nambiantamil.  
 
Unit 3-Standardisation of Malayalam: 
3.1 Peculairities of the language of Pana, Kilippattu and Tullal. 
3.2 Contributions of indigenous and European missionaries to Malayalam. 
3.3 Characteristics of contemporary Malayalam : Malayalam as administravie language. Language of scientific 
and technical literature-media language. 
 
Section-B 
Literary History 
Unit-4 Ancient and Medieval Literature: 
4.1 Pattu-Ramacharitam, Niranam works and Krishnagatha. 
4.2 Manipravalam-early and medieval manipravala works including attakkatha and champu. 
4.3 Folk literature.  
4.4 Kilippattu, Tullal and Mahakavya. 
Unit 5- Modern Literature-Poerty: 
5.1 Venmani poets and contemporaries. 
5.2 The advent of Romanticism-Poerty of Kavitraya i.e., Asan, Ulloor and Vallathol  
--- PAGE 45 ---
5.3 Poetry after Kavitraya. 
5.4 Modernism in Malayalam poetry. 
Unit 6- Modern Literature-Prose: 
6.1 Drama 
6.2 Novel 
6.3 Short story 
6.4 Biography, travelogue, essay and criticism. 
PAPER-II 
(Answers must be written in Malayalam) 
This paper will require first hand reading of the texts prescribed and is designed to test the candidate's 
critical ability. 
 
Section-A 
Unit 1 
1.1 Ramacharitam-Patalam 1. 
1.2 Kannassaramayanam-Balakandam first 25 stanzas. 
1.3 Unnunilisandesam-Purvabhagam 25 slokas including Prastavana 
1.4 Mahabharatham Kilippattu-Bhishmaparvam. 
Unit 2 
2.1 Kumaran Asan-Chintavisthayaya Sita. 
2.2 Vailoppilli-Kutiyozhikkal. 
2.3 G. Sankara Kurup-Perunthachan. 
2.4 N.V. Krishna Variar-Tivandiyile Pattu. 
Unit 3 
3.1 ONV -Bhumikkoru Charamagitam 
3.2 Ayyappa Panicker-Kurukshetram. 
3.3 Akkittam-Pandatha Messanthi 
3.4 Attur Ravivarma-Megharupan. 
Section-B 
Unit 4 
4.1 O. Chanthu Menon-Indulekha 
4.2 Thakazhy-Chemmin. 
4.3 O V Vijayan-Khasakkinte Ithihasam. 
Unit 5 
5.1 MT Vasudevan Nair-Vanaprastham (Collection). 
5.2 N S Madhavan-Higvitta (Collection). 
5.3 C J. Thomas-1128-il Crime 27. 
Unit 6 
6.1 Kuttikrishna Marar-Bharataparyatanam 
6.2 M. K Sanu-Nakshatrangalute snehabhajanam 
6.3 V.T. Bhattathirippad-Kannirum Kinavum. 
MANIPURI 
PAPER-I 
(Answers must be written in Manipuri) 
Section-A 
Language : 
a) General characteristics of Manipuri Language and history of its development; its importance and status 
among the TibetoBurman Languages of  North-East India; recent develo pment in the study of Manipuri 
language; evolution and study of old Manipuri script. 
 
b) Significant features of Manipuri language : 
i) Phonology-Phoneme-vowels, consonants juncture, tone, consonant cluster and its occurrence, syllable-its 
structure, pattern and types. 
 
ii) Morphology : Word-class, root and its types; affix and its types; grammatical categories-gender, number, 
person, case, tense and aspects, process of compounding (samas and sandhi). 
 
iii) Syntax : Word order : types of sentences, pharse and clause structures. 
--- PAGE 46 ---
Section-B 
a) Literary History of Manipuri :  
    Early period (upto 17th century)-Social and cultural background; Themes, diction and style of the works. 
    Medieval period (18th and 19th century)Social, religious and political background; Themes, diction and 
style of the works. 
 
   Modern period-Growth of major literary forms; change of Themes, diction and style. 
b) Manipuri Folk Literature : 
    Legend, Folktale, Folksong, Ballad, Proverb and Riddle. 
c) Aspects of Manipuri Culture : 
   Pre-Hindu Manipuri Faith; Advent of Hinduism and the process of syncreticism. 
   Performing arts-Lai Haraoba, Maha Ras; Indegenous games-Sagol Kangjei, Khong Kangjei, Kang. 
PAPER II 
(Answers must be written in Manipuri) 
This paper will require first hand reading of the texts prescribed and will be designed to test the candidate’s 
critical ability to assess them. 
 
Section-A 
Old and Medieval Manipuri Literature 
(a) Old Manipuri Literature 
1. O. Bhogeswar Singh (Ed.) : Numit Kappa 
2. M. Gourachandra Singh (Ed.) : Thawanthaba Hiran 
3. N. Khelchandra Singh (Ed.) : Naothingkhong Phambal Kaba  
4. M. Chandra Singh (Ed.) : Panthoibi Khonggul 
(b) Medieval Manipuri Literature : 
1. M. Chandra Singh (Ed.) : Samsok Ngamba 
2. R.K.Snahal Singh (Ed.) : Ramayana Adi Kanda 
3. N. Khelchandra SIngh (Ed.) : Dhananjoy Laibu Ningba 
4. O. Bhogeswar Singh (Ed.) : Chandrakirti Jila Changba 
Section-B 
Modern Manipuri Literature : 
(a) Poetry and Epic : 
(I) Poetry : 
(a)Manipuri Sheireng (Pub) Manipuri Sahitya Parishad, 1988 (ed.)  
   Kh. Chaoba Singh : Pi Thadoi, Lamgi Chekla Amada, Loktak 
Dr. L. Kamal Singh: Nirjanata, Nirab Rajani 
A. Minaketan Singh : Kamalda, Nonggumlakkhoda 
L. Samarendra Singh : Ingagi Nong, Mamang Leikai Thambal Satle 
E. Nilakanta Singh : Manipur, Lamangnaba 
Shri Biren : Tangkhul Hui Th. Ibopishak : Anouba Thunglaba Jiba 
(b) Kanchi Sheireng. (Pub) Manipur University 1998 (ed.) 
Dr. L. Kamal Singh: Biswa-Prem  
Shri Biren : Chaphadraba Laigi Yen 
Th. Ibopishak : Norok Patal Prithivi  
(II) Epic : 
1. A. Dorendrajit Singh : Kansa Bodha 
2. H. Anganghal Singh : Khamba-Thoibi Sheireng (SanSenba, Lei Langba, Shamu Khonggi Bichar) 
(III) Drama : 
1. S. Lalit Singh : Areppa Marup 
2. G.C. Tongbra : Matric Pass 
3. A. Samarendra : Judge Sahebki Imung 
(b) Novel, Short-story and Prose : 
(I) Novel : 
1. Dr. L. Kamal Singh : Madhabi 
2. H. Anganghal Singh : Jahera 
3. H. Guno Singh : Laman 
--- PAGE 47 ---
4. Pacha Meetei : Imphal Amasung, Magi Ishing, Nungsitki Phibam 
(II) Short-story : 
(a) Kanchi Warimacha (Pub) Manipur University 1997 (ed.) 
R.K. Shitaljit Singh : Kamala Kamala 
M.K. Binodini : Eigi Thahoudraba Heitup Lalu 
Kh. Prakash : Wanom Shareng 
(b) Parishadki Khangatlaba Warimacha (Pub) Manipuri Sahitya Parishad 1994 (ed.) 
S. Nilbir Shastri : Loukhatpa 
R.K. Elangba : Karinunggi 
(c) Anouba Manipuri Warimacha (Pub) The Cultural Forum Manipur 1992 (ed.) 
N. Kunjamohon Singh : Ijat Tanba 
E. Dinamani : Nongthak Khongnang 
(III) Prose : 
(a) Warenggi Saklon [Due Part (Pub) The Cultural Forum Manipur 1992 (ed.) 
Kh. Chaoba Singh : Khamba-Thoibigi Wari Amasung Mahakavya 
(b) Kanchi Wareng (Pub) Manipur University 1998 (ed.)  
B. Manisana Shastri : Phajaba 
Ch. Manihar Singh : Lai-Haraoba 
(c) Apunba Wareng. (Pub) Manipur University, 1986 (ed.) 
Ch. Pishak Singh : Samaj Amasung, Sanskriti 
M.K. Binodini : Thoibidu Warouhouida 
Eric Newton : Kalagi Mahousa (translated by I.R. Babu) 
(d) Manipuri Wareng (Pub) The Cultural Forum Manipur 1999 (ed.) 
S. Krishnamohan Singh : Lan 
MARATHI 
PAPER-I 
(Answers must be written in Marathi) 
Section-A 
Language and Folk-Iore : 
(a) Nature and Functions of Language (with reference to Marathi) 
Language as a signifying system : Langue and Parole; Basic functions; Poetic language; Standard Language 
and dialect; Language variations according to social parameters. 
 
Linguistic features of Marathi in thirteenth century and seventeenth century. 
(b) Dialects of Marathi  
    Ahirani; Varhadi; Dangi 
(c) Marathi Grammar  
Parts of Speech; Case-system; Prayog-vichar (Voice) 
(d)Nature and kinds of Folk-lore (with special reference to Marathi) 
Lok-Geet, Lok Katha, Lok Natya 
Section-B 
History of Literature and Literary Criticism: 
(a) History of Marathi Literature 
1. From beginning to 1818 AD, with special reference to the following : The Mahanubhava writers, the Varkari 
poets, the Pandit poets, the Shahirs, Bakhar literature. 
 
2. From 1850 to 1990, with special reference to deve lopments in the following major forms : Poetry, Fiction 
(Novel and Short Story), Drama; and major literary cu rrents and movements, Romantic, Realist, Modernist, 
Dalit Gramin, Feminist. 
 
(b) Literary Criticism 
1. Nature and function of Literature; 
2. Evaluation of Literature; 
3. Nature, Objectives and Methods of Criticism; 
4. Literature, Culture and Society. 
PAPER-II 
(Answers must be written in Marathi) 
--- PAGE 48 ---
Textual study of prescribed literary works 
The paper will require first-hand reading of the texts pres cribed and will be designed to test the candidate’s 
critical ability. 
 
Section-A 
Prose 
(1) ‘Smritishala’ 
(2) Mahatma Jotiba Phule “Shetkaryacha Asud; ‘Sarvajanik Satyadharma’ 
(3) S.V. Ketkar ‘Brahmankanya; 
(4) P.K. Atre ‘Sashtang Namaskar’ 
(5) Sharchchandra Muktibodh ‘Jana Hey Volatu Jethe’ 
(6) Uddhav Shelke ‘Shilan’ 
(7) Baburao Bagul ‘Jevha Mi Jaat Chorli Hoti’ 
(8) Gouri Deshpande ‘Ekek Paan Galavaya’ 
(9) P.I. Sonkamble ‘Athavaninche Pakshi’ 
Section-B 
Poetry 
(1) Namadevanchi Abhangawani’ Ed: Inamdar, Relekar, Mirajkar Modern Book Depot, Pune 
(2) ‘Painjan’ Ed : M.N. Adwant Sahitya Prasar Kendra, Nagpur 
(3) ‘Damayanti-Swayamvar’ By Raghunath Pandit 
(4) ‘Balakvinchi Kavita’ By Balkavi 
(5) ‘Vishakha’ By Kusumagraj 
(6) ‘Mridgandh’ By Vinda Karandikar 
(7) ‘Jahirnama’ By Narayan Surve 
(8) ‘Sandhyakalchya Kavita’ By Grace 
(9) ‘Ya Sattet Jeev Ramat Nahi’ By Namdev Dhasal 
NEPALI 
PAPER-I 
(Answers must be written in Nepali) 
Section-A 
1. History of the origin and development of Nepali as one of the new IndoAryan Languages 
2. Fundamentals of Nepali Grammar and phonology: 
(i) Nominal forms and categories : Gender, Number, Case, Adjectives,Pronouns, Avyayas 
(ii) Verbal forms and categoriesTense, Aspects, Voice, Roots and Fixes 
(iii) Nepali Swara and Vyanjana;  
3. Major Dialects of Nepali 
4. Standardisation and Modernisation of Nepali with special reference to language movements (viz. Halanta 
Bahiskar, Jharrovad etc.) 
5. Teaching of Nepali language in IndiaIts history and development with special reference to its socio-cultural 
aspects. 
 
Section-B 
1. History of Nepali literature with special reference to its development in India. 
2. Fundamental concepts and theories of literature : 
   Kavya/Sahitya, Kavya Prayojan, Literary genres, Shabda Shakti, Rasa, Alankara, Tragedy, Comedy, 
Aesthetics, Stylistics. 
 
3. Major literary trends and movementsSwachchhanda tavad, Yatharthavad, Astitwavad, Ayamik Movement, 
Contemporary Nepali writings, Postmodernism. 
 
4. Nepali folklores (the following folkform only)- Sawai, Jhyaurey, Selo, Sangini, Lahari. 
PAPER-II 
(Answers must be written in Nepali) 
This paper will require first hand reading of the texts pr escribed below and questions will be designed to test 
the candidate’s critical acumen. 
 
Section-A 
1. Santa Jnandil Das-Udaya Lahari 
2. Lekhnath Poudyal-Tarun Tapasi  
(Vishrams III, V, VI, XII, XV, XVIII only) 
--- PAGE 49 ---
3. Agam Singh Giri- Jaleko Pratibimba  : Royeko Pratidhwani  (The following poems only - rasawako 
Chichy-ahatsanga Byunjheko Ek Raat, Chhorolai, Jaleko Pratibimba : Royeko Pratidhwani, Hamro Akashmani 
Pani Hunchha Ujyalo, Tihar).  
 
4. Haribhakta Katuwal- Yo Zindagi Khai Ke Zindagi  : (The following poems only - Jeevan : Ek Dristi, Yo 
Zindagi Khai Ke Zindagi, Akashka tara Ke Tara, Hamilai Nirdho Nasamjha, Khai Many-ata Yahan 
Atmahutiko Balidan Ko). 
 
5. Balkrishna Sama - Prahlad  
6. Manbahadur Mukhia - Andhyaroma Banchneharu  (The following OneAct plays only - ‘Andhyaroma 
Banchneharu’, ‘Suskera’). 
 
Section-B 
1. Indra Sundas-Sahara 
2. Lilbahadur Chhetri-Brahmaputrako Chheuchhau 
3. Rupnarayan Sinha- Katha Navaratna  (The following stories only-Biteka Kura, Jimmewari Kasko, 
Dhanamatiko Cinema-Swapna, Vidhwasta Jeevan). 
 
4. Indrabahadur Rai- Vipana Katipaya  (The following stories only-Raatbhari Huri Chalyo, Jayamaya 
Aphumatra 
Lekha-pani Aipugi, Bhagi, Ghosh Babu, Chhutyaiyo). 
5. Sanu Lama- Katha Sampad (The following stories only-Swasni Manchhey, Khani Tarma Ekdin, Phurbale 
Gaun Chhadyo, Asinapo Manchhey). 
 
6. Laxmi Prasad Devkota- Laxmi Nibandha Sangraha  (The following essays only-Sri Ganeshaya Namah, 
Nepali Sahityako Itihasma Sarvashrestha Purus, Kalpana, Kala Ra Jeevan, Gadha Buddhiman Ki Guru).  
 
7. Ramkrishna Sharma- Das Gorkha (The following essays only-Kavi, Samaj Ra Sahitya, Sahityama 
Sapekshata, Sahityik Ruchiko Praudhata, Nepali Sahityako Pragati). 
 
ORIYA 
PAPER-I 
(Answers must be written in Oriya) 
Section-A 
History of Oriya Language 
(1) Origin and development of Oriya Language-Influence of Austric, Dravidian, Perso-Arabic and English on 
Oriya Language. 
 
(2) Phonetics and Phonemics : Vowels, Consonants Principles of changes in Oriya sounds. 
(3) Morphology : Morphemes (free, bound compound and complex), derivational and inflectional affixes, case 
inflection, conjugation of verb. 
 
(4) Syntax : Kinds of sentences and their transformation, structure of sentences. 
(5) Semantics-Different types of change in meaning Euphemism. 
(6) Common errors in spellings, grammatical uses and construction of sentences. 
(7) Regional variations in Oriya Language (Western, Southern and Northern Oriya) and Dialects (Bhatri and 
Desia). 
 
Section-B 
History of Oriya Literature 
(1) Historical backgrounds (social, cultural and political) of Oriya Literature of different periods. 
(2) Ancient epics, ornate kavyas and padavalis. 
(3) Typical structural forms of Oriya Literature (Koili, Chautisa, Poi, Chaupadi, Champu). 
(4) Modern trends in poetry, drama short story, novel, essay and literary criticism.  
PAPER-II 
(Answers must be written in Oriya) 
Critical Study of texts –  
The paper will require first hand reading of the text and test the critical ability of the candidate. 
Section-A 
Poetry : 
(Ancient) 
1. Sãralã Das-Shanti Parva from Mãhãbharãta. 
2. Jaganãth Das-Bhãgãbate, XI Skandha-Jadu Avadhuta Sambãda.  
(Medieval) 
3. Dinãkrushna Dãs-Rasakallola-(Chhãndas-16 & 34) 
--- PAGE 50 ---
4. Upendra Bhanja-Lãvanyabati (Chhãndas-1 & 2) 
(Modern) 
5. Rãdhãnãth Rãy-Chandrabhãgã 
6. Mãyãdhãr Mãnasinha-Jeevan Chitã 
7. Satchidãnanda Routray-Kabitã-1962  
8. Ramãkãnta Ratha-Saptama Ritu. 
Section-B 
Drama : 
9. Manoranjan Dãs-Kãtha-Ghodã 
10. Bijay Mishra-Tata Niranjanã 
Novel : 
11. Fakir Mohan Senãpati-Chhamãna Ãthaguntha 
12. Gopinãth Mohanty-Dãnãpãni  
Short Story : 
13. Surendra Mohãnty-Marãlãra Mrityu 
14. Manoj Dãs-Laxmira Abhisara 
Essay : 
15. Chittaranjan Dãs-Taranga O Tadit (First five essays). 
16. Chandra Sekhar Rath-Mun Satyadhãrma Kahuchhi (First five essays) 
  
PUNJABI 
PAPER-I 
(Answers must be written in Punjabi in Gurumukhi Script) 
Section-A 
(a) Origin of Punjabi language : different stages of development and recent development in Punjabi language : 
characteristics of Punjabi phonology and the study of its tones : classification of vowels and consonants. 
 
(b) Punjabi morphology : the number-gender system (animate and inanimate), prefixes, affixes and different 
categories of Post positions: Punjabi word formation: Tatsam. Tad Bhav , forms: Sentence structure, the 
notion of subject and object in Punjabi: Noun and verb phrases. 
 
(c) Language and dialect : the notions  of dialect and idiolect; major di alects of Punjabi; Pothohari, Majhi, 
Doabi, Malwai, Puadhi; the validity of speech variation on the basis of social stratification, the distinctive 
features of various dialects with special reference to tones. Language and script; origin and development of 
Gurmukhi; suitability of Gurmukhi for Punjabi. 
 
(d) Classical background : Nath Jogi Sahit  
     Medieval literature : Gurmat, Sufti, Kissa and Var Janamsakhis.  
Section-B 
(a) Modern Trends  -   Mystic, romantic, progressive and neomystic (Vir Singh, Puran Singh, Mohan Singh,  
Amrita Pritam, Bawa Balwant, Pritam Singh Safeer, J.S. Neki). 
 
          Experimentalist (Jasbir Singh Ahluwalia, Ravinder Ravi, Ajaib Kamal)  
             Aesthetes (Harbhajan Singh, Tara Singh). Neo-progressive (Pash, Jagtar, Patar) 
Origin and Development of Genres : 
(b) Folk literature  - Folk songs,  Folk tales. Riddles, Proverbs. 
Epic   - (Vir Singh, Avtar Singh, Azad Mohan Singh) 
Lyric  - (Gurus, Sufis and Modern Lyricists-Mohan Singh  Amrita Pritam, Shiv Kumar,            
Harbhajan Singh) 
 
(c) Drama  (I.C. Nanda, Harcharan Singh, Balwant Gargi, S.S.Sekhon, Charan Das Sidhu)  
     Novel  (Vir Singh, Nanak Singh, Jaswant Singh Kanwal, K.S. Duggal, Sukhbir, Gurdial Singh, 
Dalip     Kaur Tiwana, Swaran Chandan) 
 
     Short Story  (Sujan Singh, K.S. Virk, Prem Parkash, Waryam Sandhu). 
(d) Socio - cultural Literary influences - Sanskrit, Persian and Western. 
     Essay - (Puran Singh, Teja Singh, Gurbaksh Singh) 
     Literary Criticism - (S.S. Sekhon, Attar Singh, Kishan Singh, Harbhajan Singh, Najam Hussain Sayyad). 
PAPER-II 
(Answers must be written in Punjabi in Gurumukhi Script) 
--- PAGE 51 ---
This paper will require first-hand reading of the texts prescribed and will be designed to test the candidate’s 
critical ability. 
 
Section-A 
a) Sheikh Farid  The complete Bani as included in the Adi Granth. 
b) Guru Nanak  Japu Ji Baramah, Asa di Var 
c) Bulleh Shah  Kafian 
d) Waris Shah  Heer 
Section-B 
a) Shah Mohammad  Jangnama (JangSinghan te Firangian) 
    Dhani Ram Chatrik  Chandan Va ri (Poet), Sufi Khana, Nawan Jahan 
b) Nanak Singh (Novelist) Chitta Lahu, Pavittar Papi, Ek Mian Do Talwaran 
c) Gurbaksh Singh  Zindagi-di-Ras, Nawan Shivala, Merian Abhul Yadaan. 
    (Essayist)   
    Balraj Sahni   Mera Roosi Safarnama 
    (Travelogue)   Mera Pakistani Safarnama 
d) Balwant Gargi   Loha Kutt 
    (Dramatist)   Dhuni-di-Agg 
                                           Sultan Razia 
    Sant Singh Sahityarth    Sekhon  
    (Critic)                Parsidh Punjabi Kavi 
                                           Punjabi Kav Shiromani 
  
SANSKRIT 
PAPER-I 
There will be three questions as indicated in the que stion paper which must be answered in Sanskrit. 
The remaining questions must be answered either in Sa nskrit or in the medium of examination opted by the 
candidate.  
 
Section-A 
1. Significant features of the grammar, with particular stress on Sanjna, Sandhi, Karaka, Samasa, Kartari and 
Karmani vacyas (voice usages) (to be answered in Sanskrit). 
 
2. (a) Main characteristics of Vedic Sanskrit language. 
(b) Prominent features of classical Sanskrit language. 
(c) Contribution of Sanskrit to linguistic studies. 
3. General Knowledge of:-  
   (a)  Literary history of Sanskit, 
   (b)  Principal trends of literary criticism 
   (c)  Ramayana, 
   (d)  Mahabharata 
   (e)  The origin and development of literary geners of Mahakavya 
Rupaka (drama) 
Katha 
Akhyayika 
Campu 
Khandakavya 
Muktaka Kavya. 
Section-B 
4. Essentials of Indian Culture with stress on  
a) Purusarthas, b) Samskaras, c) Varnasramavyavastha, d) Arts and fine arts, e) Technical sciences 
5. Trends of Indian Philosophy 
a) Mimansa, b) Vedanta, c) Nyaya, d) Vaisesika, e) Sankhya, f) Yoga, g) Bauddha, h) Jaina, i) 
Carvaka 
6. Short Essay in Sanskrit 
7. Unseen passage with the questions, to be answered in Sanskrit. 
PAPER-II 
Question from Group 4 is to be answered in Sanskrit only. Question from Groups 1, 2 and 3 are to be 
answered either in Sanskrit or in the medium opted by the candidate. 
 
--- PAGE 52 ---
Section-A 
General study of the following groups: 
Group 1 
a) Raghuvamsam-Kalidasa 
b) Kumarasambhavam-Kalidasa 
c) Kiratarjuniyam-Bharavi 
d) Sisupalavadham-Magha 
e) Naisadhiyacaritam-Sriharsa 
f) Kadambari-Banabhatta 
g) Dasakumaracaritam -Dandin 
h) Sivarajyodayam-S.B. Varnekar 
Group 2 
a) Isavasyopanisad 
b) Bhagavadgita 
c) Sundarakanda of Valmiki’s Ramayana 
d) Arthasastra of Kautilya 
Group 3 
a) Svapnavasavadattam- Bhasa 
b) Abhijnanasakuntalam- Kalidasa 
c) Mrcchakatikam- Sudraka 
d) Mudraraksasam- Visakhadatta 
e) Uttararamacaritam- Bhavabhuti 
f) Ratnavali- Sriharshavardhana 
g) Venisamharam- Bhattanarayana 
Group 4 
Short notes in Sanskrit on the following: 
a) Meghadutam-Kalidasa 
b) Nitisatakam-Bhartrhari 
c) Panchtantra 
d) Rajatarangini-Kalhana 
e) Harsacaritam-Banabhatta 
f) Amarukasatakam-Amaruka 
g) Gitagovindam-Jayadeva 
Section-B 
Questions from Groups 1 & 2 are to be answered in Sa nskrit only. (Questions from Groups 3 & 4 are to 
be answered in Sanskrit or in the medium opted by the candidate). 
 
This Section will require first hand reading of the following selected texts : 
Group 1 
(a) Raghuvansam-CantoI, Verses 1 to 10 
(b) Kumarasambhavam-Canto I, Verses 1 to 10 
(c) Kiratarjuniyam-Canto I, Verses 1 to 10  
Group 2 
(a) Isavasyopanisad-verses-1, 2, 4, 6, 7, 15 and 18 
(b) Bhagavatgita II chapter verses 13 to 25 
(c) Sundarakandam of Valmiki Canto 15, Verses 15 to 30 (Geeta Press Edition) 
Group 3 
(a) Meghadutam-verses 1 to 10 
(b) Nitisatakam-Verses 1 to 10 (Edited by D.D. Kosambi Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan Publication) 
(c) Kadambari-Sukanaso-padesa (only) 
Group 4 
(a) Svapnavasavadattam Act VI 
(b) Abhijnansakuntalam Act IV verses 15 to 30 (M.R. Kale Edition) 
(c) Uttararamacharitam Act 1 verses 31 to 47 (M.R. Kale Edition) 
SANTHALI 
--- PAGE 53 ---
PAPER-I 
(Answers must be written in Santhali) 
Section-A 
Part-I History of Santhali Language 
I. Main Austric Language family, population and distribution. 
II. Grammatical structure of Santhali Language. 
III. Important character of Santhali Language : Phonology, Morphology, Syntax, Semantics, Translation, 
Lexicography. 
 
IV. Impact of other languages on Santhali. 
V. Standardization of Santhali Language. 
Part-II History of Santhali Literature. 
I. Literary trends of the following four periods of History of Santhali Literature. 
(a) Ancient literature before 1854. 
(b) Missionary period : Literature between 1855 to 1889 AD. 
(c) Medieval period : Literature between 1890 to 1946 AD. 
(d) Modern period : Literature from 1947 AD to till date. 
II. Writing tradition in History of Santhali Literature. 
Section-B 
Literary forms - Main characteristics, history and development of following literary forms. 
Part-I : Folk Literature in Santhali-folk song, folk tale, phrase, idioms, puzzles and Kudum. 
Part-II : Modern literature in Santhali 
      (a) Development of poetry and prominent poets. 
(b) Development of prose and prominent writers. 
     (i) Novels and prominent Novelists. 
    (ii) Stories and prominent story writers. 
   (iii) Drama and prominent Dramatist. 
   (iv) Criticism and prominent critics. 
   (v) Essay, sketches, memoirs, travelogues and prominent writers. 
Santhali writers : 
Shyam Sunder Hembram, Pandit Raghunath Murmu, Barha Beshra, Sadhu Ramchand Murmu, Narayan Soren 
'Toresutam', Sarada Prasad Kisku, Raghunath Tudu, Kalipada Soren, Sakla Soren, Digambar Hansda, Aditya 
Mitra 'Santhali', Babulal Murmu 'Adivasi', Jadumani Beshra, Arjun Hembram, Krishna Chandra Tudu, 
Rupchand Hansda, Kalendra Nath Mandi, Mahadev Hansda, Gour Chandra Murmu, Thakur Prasad Murmu, 
Hara Prasad Murmu, Uday Nath Majhi, Parimal Hemb ram, Dhirendra Nath Baske,  Shyam Charan Hembram, 
Damayanti Beshra, T.K. Rapaj, Boyha Biswanath Tudu.  
 
Part-III : Cultural Heritage of Santhali tradition, customs, festival and rituals (birth, marriage and death). 
PAPER-II 
(Answers must be written in Santhali) 
Section-A 
This paper will require in-depth reading of the following texts and the questions will be designed to 
test the candidates' criticial ability. 
 
Ancient Literature : 
Prose 
(a) Kherwal Bonso Dhorom Puthi-Majhi Ramdas Tudu "Rasika". 
(b) Mare Hapramko Reyak Katha-L.O. Scrafsrud. 
(c) Jomsim Binti Lita-Mangal Chandra Turkulumang Soren. 
(d) Marang Buru Binti-Kanailal Tudu. 
Poetry 
(a) Karam Sereng-Nunku Soren. 
(b) Devi Dasain Sereng-Manindra Hansda. 
(c) Horh Sereng-W.G. Archer. 
(d) Baha Sereng-Balaram Tudu 
(e) Dong Sereng-Padmashri Bhagwat Murmu 'Thakur' 
(f) Hor Sereng-Raghunath Murmu. 
(g) Soros Sereng-Babulal Murmu "Adivasi" 
--- PAGE 54 ---
(h) More Sin More Nida-Rup Chand Hansda 
(i) Judasi Madwa Latar-Tez Narayan Murmu. 
Section-B 
Modern Literature 
Part-I : Poetry 
(a) Onorhen Baha Dhalwak-Paul Jujhar Soren. 
(b) Asar Binti-Narayan Soren "Tore Sutam" 
(c) Chand Mala-Gora Chand Tudu. 
(d) Onto Baha Mala-Aditya Mitra "Santhali" 
(e) Tiryo Tetang-Hari Har Hansda 
(f) Sisirjon Rar-Thakur Prasad Murmu. 
Part-II : Novels 
(a) Harmawak Ato-R. Karstiars (Translator-R.R. Kisku Rapaz). 
(b) Manu Mati-Chandra Mohan Hansda  
(c) Ato Orak-Doman Hansda 
(d) Ojoy Gada Dhiphre-Nathenial Murmu 
Part-III : Stories 
(a) Jiyon Gada-Rup Chand Hansda and Jadumani Beshra. 
(b) Mayajaal-Doman Sahu, 'Samir' and Padmashri Bhagwat Murmu 'Thakur' 
Part-IV : Drama 
(a) Kherwar Bir-Pandit Raghunath Murmu 
(b) Juri Khatir-Dr. K.C. Tudu 
(c) Birsa Bir-Ravi Lal Tudu 
 
Part-V : Biography 
Santal Ko Ren Mayam Gohako-Dr. Biswanath Hansda. 
SINDHI 
PAPER-I 
(Answers must be written in Sindhi) 
(Arabic or Devanagari script) 
Section-A 
1. (a) Origin and evolution of Sindhi language-views of different scholars. 
    (b) Significant linguistic features of Sindhi language, including those pertaining to its phonology, 
morphology and syntax. 
 
    (c) Major dialects of the Sindhi language. 
    (d) Sindhi vocabularly-stages of its growth, including those in the pre-partition and post-partition periods. 
    (e) Historical study of various Writing Systems (Scripts) of Sindhi. 
     (f) Changes in the structure of Sindhi language in In dia, after partition, due to influence of other languages     
and social conditions. 
 
Section-B 
2. Sindhi literature through the ages in context of socio-cultural conditions in the respective periods : 
a. Early medieval literature upto 1350 A.D. including folk literature. 
b. Late medicval period from 1350 A.D. to 1850 A.D. 
c. Renaissance period from 1850 A.D. to 1947 A.D. 
d. Modern period from 1947 and onward s (Literary genres in Modern Sind hi literature and experiments in 
poetry, drama, novel, short story, essay, literary  criticism, biography, autobiography, memoirs, and 
travelogues.) 
 
PAPER-II 
(Answers must be written in Sindhi) 
(Arabic or Devanagari script). 
This paper will require the first-hand reading of the texts prescribed and will be designed to test the 
candidates’ critical ability. 
 
Section-A 
References to context and critical appreciation of the texts included in this section. 
--- PAGE 55 ---
(1) Poetry 
a. “Shah Jo Choond Shair” : ed. H.I. Sadarangani, Published by Sahitya Akademi (First 100 pages) 
b. “Sachal Jo Choond Kalam” : ed. Kalyan B. Advani Published by Sahitya Akademi (Kafis only) 
c. “Sami-a-ja Choond Sloka” : ed. B.H. Nagrani Published by Sahitya Akademi (First 100 pages) 
d. “Shair-e-Bewas” : by Kishinchand Bewas (“Saamoondi Sipoon” portion only) 
e. “Roshan Chhanvro” : Narayan Shyam  
f. “Virhange Khanpoije Sindhi Shair jee Choond” : ed. H.I. Sadarangani Published by Sahitya Akademi 
(2) Drama 
g. “Behtareen Sindhi Natak” (One-act Plays) : Edited by M. Kamal Published by Gujarat Sindhi Academy. 
h. “Kako Kaloomal” (Full-length Play) : by Madan Jumani 
Section-B 
References to context and critical appreciation of the texts included in this section. 
a. ‘Pakheeara Valar Khan Vichhrya’ (Novel) : by Gobind Malhi 
b. ‘Sat Deenhan’ (Novel) : by Krishan Khatwani 
c. ‘Choond Sindhi Kahanyoon’ (Short Stories) Vol. III. : Edited by Prem Prakash, Published by Sahitya 
Akademi. 
d. ‘Bandhan’ (Short Stories) : Sundari Uttamchandani 
e. ‘Behtareen Sindhi Mazmoon’ (Essays) : Edited by Hiro Thakur, published by Gujarat Sindhi Akademi. 
f. ‘Sindhi Tanqeed’ (Criticism) : Edited by Harish Vaswani : Published by Sahitya Akademi. 
g. ‘Mumhinjee Hayati-a ja Sona Ropa varqa’ (Autobiography) : by Popati Hiranandani  
h. “Dr. Choithram Gidwani” (Biography) : by Vishnu Sharma 
TAMIL 
PAPER-I 
(Answers must be written in Tamil) 
Section-A 
Part: 1 History of Tamil Language 
Major Indian Language Families  – The place of Tamil among Indi an languages in general and 
Dravidian in particular-Enumeration and Distribution of Dravidian languages.  
 
The language of Sangam literature – The language of medieval Tamil: Pallava period only-Historical 
study of Nouns, Verbs, adjectives, adverbs Tense markers and case markers in Tamil. 
 
Borrowing of words from other languages into Tamil-Regional and social dialects-difference between 
literary and spoken Tamil. 
 
Part: 2 History of Tamil Literature 
Tolkappiyam-Sangam Literatue - The division of Akam and puram-The secular characteristics of 
Sangam Literature-The development of Ethical literatureSilappadikaram and Manimekalai. 
 
Part: 3 Devotional literature (Alwars and Nayanmars)  
The bridal mysticism in Alwar hymns-Minor literary  forms (Tutu, Ula, Parani, Kuravanji) Social 
factors for the development of Modern Tamil literature : Novel, Short story and New Poetry-The impact of 
various political ideologies on modern writings. 
 
Section-B 
Part:1 Recent trends in Tamil Studies 
Approaches to criticism: Social, psychological, hi storical and moralistic-the use of criticism-the 
various techniques in literature; Ullurai, Iraicchi, Thonmam (Myth) Otturuvagam (allegory), Angadam (Satire), 
Meyppadu, Padimam(image), Kuriyeedu (Symbol), Ir unmai (ambiguity)-The co ncept of comparative 
literature-the principle of comparative literature. 
 
Part: 2 Folk literature in Tamil  
Ballads, Songs, proverbs and riddles-Sociological study of Tamil folklore. Uses of  translation – 
Translation of Tamil works into other languages-Development of journalism in Tamil. 
 
Part: 3 Cultural Heritage of the Tamils 
Concept of Love and War-Concept of Aramthe ethical codes adopted by the ancient Tamils in their 
warfare-customs, beliefs, rituals, modes of worship in the five Thinais. 
 
The cultural changes as revealed in post sangam literature-cultural fusion in the medieval period 
(Jainism & Buddhism). The development of arts and arch itecture through the ages (Pallavas, later cholas, and 
Nayaks). The impact of various political, social, religious and cultural movements on Tamil Society. The role 
of mass media in the cultural change of contemporary Tamil society. 
 
--- PAGE 56 ---
PAPER-II 
(Answers must be written in Tamil) 
The paper will require first hand reading of the Text prescribed and will be designed to test the critical 
ability of the candidate. 
 
Section-A 
Part: 1 Ancient Literature 
(1) Kuruntokai (1-25 poems) 
(2) Purananurui (182-200 poems) 
(3) Tirukkural Porutpal : Arasiyalum Amaichiyalum (from Iraimatchi to Avaianjamai) 
Part : 2 Epic Literature 
(1) Silappadikaram: Madhurai Kandam only. 
(2) Kambaramayanam: Kumbakarunan Vadhai Padalam 
Part 3: Devotional Literature 
(1) Tiruvasagam: Neetthal Vinnappam 
(2) Tiruppavai: (Full Text)  
Section-B 
Modern Literature 
Part 1 : Poetry 
(1) Bharathiar: Kannan Pattu 
(2) Bharathidasan: Kudumba Vilakku 
(3) Naa. Kamarasan: Karuppu Malarkal 
Prose 
(1) Mu. Varadharajanar : Aramum Arasiyalum 
(2) C N Annadurai : Ye!Thazhntha Tamilagame. 
Part : 2 Novel, Short story and Drama 
(1) Akilon: Chittirappavai 
(2) Jayakanthan: Gurupeedam 
(3) Cho: Yarukkum Vetkamillai 
Part: 3 Folk Literature 
(1) Muthuppattan Kathai Edited by Na. Vanamamalai, (Publication: Madurai Kamaraj University) 
(2) Malaiyaruvi, Edited by Ki. Va Jagannathan (Publication: Saraswathi, Mahal, Thanjavur) 
 
 
TELUGU 
PAPER-I 
(Answers must be written in Telugu) 
Section-A  
Language 
1. Place of Telugu among Dravidian languages and its antiquity-Etymological history of Telugu, Tenugu and 
Andhra. 
 
2. Major linguistic changes in phonological, morphological, grammatical and syntactical levels, from Proto-
Dravidian to old Telugu and from old Telugu to Modern Telugu. 
 
3. Evolution of spoken Telugu when compared to classical Telugu-Formal and functional view of Telugu 
language. 
 
4. Influence of other languages and its impact on Telugu. 
5. Modernization of Telugu language. 
    (a) Linguistic and literary movements and their role in modernization of Telugu. 
    (b) Role of media in modernization of Telugu (Newspapers, Radio, TV etc.) 
    (c) Problems of terminology and mechanisms in coining new terms in Telugu in various discourses 
including 
         scientific and technical.  
6. Dialects of Telugu-Regional and social variations and problems of standardization. 
7. Syntax-Major divisions of Telugu sentences-simple, complex and compound sentences-Noun and verb 
predications-Processes of nominlization and relativization-Direct and indirect reporting-conversion processes. 
 
--- PAGE 57 ---
8. Translation-Problems of translatio n, cultural, social and idiomatic-Met hods of translation-Approaches to 
translation-Literary and other kinds of translation-various uses of translation. 
 
Section-B 
Literature 
1. Literature in Pre-Nannaya Period-Marga and Desi poetry. 
2. Nannaya Period-Historical and literary background of Andhra Mahabharata. 
3. Saiva poets and their contribution-Dwipada, Sataka, Ragada, Udaharana. 
4. Tikkana and his place in Telugu literature.  
5. Errana and his literary works-Nachana Somana and his new approach to poetry. 
6. Srinatha and Potana-Their woks and contribution. 
7. Bhakti poets in Telugu literature-Tallapaka Annamayya, Ramadasu, Tyagayya. 
8. Evolution of prabandhas-Kavya and prabandha. 
9. Southern school of Telugu literature-Raghunatha Nayaka, Chemakura Vankatakavi and women poets-
Literary forms like yakshagana, prose and padakavita. 
 
10. Modern Telugu Literature and literary forms-Novel, Short Story, Drama, Playlet and poetic forms. 
11. Literary Movements : Reformation, Nationalism, Neo-classicism, Romanticism and Progressive, 
Revolutionary movements. 
 
12. Digambarakavulu, Feminist and Dalit Literature. 
13. Main divisions of folk literature-Performing folk arts. 
PAPER-II 
(Answers must be written in Telugu) 
This paper will require first hand reading of the prescribed texts and will be designed to test the candidate's 
critical ability, which will be in relation to the following approaches. 
 
i) Aesthetic approach-Rasa, Dhwani, Vakroti and Auchitya-Formal and Structural-Imagery and Symbolism. 
ii) Sociological, Historical, Ideological, Psychological approaches. 
Section-A 
1. Nannaya-Dushyanta Charitra (Adiparva 4th Canto verses 5-109) 
2. Tikkana-Sri Krishna Rayabaramu (Udyoga parva -3rd Canto verses 1144) 
3. Srinatha-Guna Nidhi Katha (Kasikhandam, 4th Canto, verses 76-133) 
4. Pingali Surana-Sugatri Salinulakatha (Kalapurnodayamu 4 Canto verses, 60-142) 
5. Molla-Ramayanamu (Balakanda including avatarika)  
6. Kasula Purushothama Kavi-Andhra Nayaka Satakamu 
Section-B 
7. Gurajada Appa Rao - Animutyalu (Short stories) 
8. Viswanatha Satyanarayana-Andhra prasasti 
9. Devulapalli Krishna Sastry - Krishnapaksham (excluding Urvasi and Pravasam) 
10. Sri Sri - Maha prastanam. 
11. Jashuva - Gabbilam (Part I) 
12. C. Narayana Reddy - Karpuravasanta rayalu. 
13. Kanuparti Varalakshmamma - Sarada lekhalu (Part I) 
14. Atreya - N.G.O.  
15. Racha konda Visswanatha Sastry - Alpajaeevi. 
URDU 
PAPER-I 
(Answers must be written in Urdu) 
Section-A 
Development of Urdu Language 
a) Development of Indo-Aryan (i) Old IndoAryan (ii) Middle Indo Aryan (iii) New Indo Aryan 
b) Western Hindi and its dialects Brij Bhasha Khadi Boli, Haryanavi Kannauji, Bundeli-Theories about the 
origin of Urdu Language 
 
c) Dakhani Urdu-Origin and development, its significant linguistic features. 
d) Social and Cultural roots of Urdu language-and its distinctive features. 
Script, Phonology, Morphology, Vocabulary.  
Section-B 
--- PAGE 58 ---
a) Genres and their development : (i)  Poetry : Ghazal, Masnavi, Qasida, Marsia, Rubai, Jadid Nazm,  
        (ii) Prose : Novel, Short Story, Dastan, Drama, Inshaiya, Khutoot,   
Biography. 
        
       b) Significant features of  : (i) Deccani, Delhi and Lucknow schools (ii) Sir Syed movement, Romantic   
movement, Progressive movement, Modernism. 
 
c) Literary Criticism and its development with referenc e to Hali, Shibli, Kaleemuddin Ahmad, Ehtisham     
Hussain, Ale-Ahmad Suroor. 
 
       d) Essay writing (covering literary and imaginative topics) 
PAPER-II 
(Answers must be written in Urdu) 
This paper will require first hand reading of the texts prescribed and will be designed to test the 
candidate's critical ability. 
 
Section-A 
1. Mir Amman   Bagho-Babar 
2. Ghalib  Intikhab-e-Khutoot-e-Ghalib 
3. Mohd. Husain Azad Nairang-e-Khayal  
4. Prem Chand   Godan 
5. Rajendra Singh  Apne Dukh Mujhe Bedi Dedo 
6. Abul Kalam Azad  Ghubar-e-Khatir 
Section-B 
1. Mir   Intikhab-e-Kalam-e-Mir (Ed. Abdul Haq.) 
2. Mir Hasan  Sahrul Bayan 
3. Ghalib  Diwan-e-Ghalib 
4. Iqbal   Bal-e-Jibrail 
5. Firaq   Gul-e-Naghma 
6. Faiz   Dast-e-Saba 
7. Akhtruliman  Bint-e-Lamhat 
 
MANAGEMENT 
The candidate should make a study of the concept and development of management as science and art drawing 
upon the contributions of leading thinkers of management and apply the concepts to the real life of government 
and business decision making keeping in view the changes in the strategic and operative environment.  
 
PAPER – I 
1. Managerial Function and Process: 
Concept and Foundations of Management, Evolution of  Management Thoughts; Managerial Functions –   
Planning, Organizing, Controlling; Decision making; Role of Manager, Managerial skills; Entrepreneurship; 
Management of innovation; Managing in a global environment, Flexible Systems Management; Social 
responsibility and managerial ethics; Process and custom er orientation; Managerial processes on direct and 
indirect value chain.  
 
2. Organisational Behaviour and Design: 
Conceptual model of organization behaviour; The individual processes – personality, values and attitude, 
perception, motivation, learning and reinforcement, work stress and stress management; The dynamics of 
organization behaviour – power and politics, conflict and negotia-tion, leadership process and styles, 
communication; The Organizational Processes - decision making, job design; Classical, Neoclassical and 
Contingency approaches to organizational design; Orga nizational theory and design – organizational culture, 
managing cultural diversity, learning organization; or ganizational change and development; Knowledge Based 
Enterprise – systems and processes; Networked and virtual organizations.  
 
3. Human Resource Management: 
HR challenges; HRM functions; The future challenges of HRM; Strategic Management of human resources; 
Human resource planning; Job analysis; Job evaluation; Recruitment and selection; Training and development; 
Promotion and transfer; Performance management; Compensation management and benefits; Employee morale 
and productivity; Management of organizational climate and Industrial relations; Human resources accounting 
and audit; Human resource information system; International human resource management. 
 
4. Accounting for Managers: 
Financial accounting – concept, importance and scope, generally accepted accounting principles, preparation of 
financial tatements with special reference to analysis of a balance sheet and measur ement of business income, 
inventory valuation and depreciation, financial statemen t analysis, fund flow anal ysis, the statement of cash 
flows; Management accounting – concept, need, impor tance and scope; Cost accounting – records and 
processes, cost ledger and control accounts, reconciliation and integration between financial and cost accounts; 
Overhead cost and control, Job and process costing, Budget and budgetary control, Performance budgeting, 
--- PAGE 59 ---
Zero-base budgeting, relevant costing and costing for decision-making, standard costing and variance analysis, 
marginal costing and absorption costing.  
 
5. Financial Management: 
Goals of finance function; Concepts of value and return; Valuation of bonds and shares; Management of 
working capital: Estimation and financin g; Management of cash, receivables , inventory and current liabilities; 
Cost of capital; Capital budgeting; Financial and operating leverage; Design of capital structure: theories and 
practices; Shareholder value creation: dividend policy, co rporate financial policy and strategy, management of 
corporate distress and restructuring strategy; Capital and money markets: institutions and instruments; Leasing, 
hire purchase and venture capital; Regulation of capita l market; Risk and return: portfolio theory; CAPM; 
APT; Financial derivatives: option, futures, swap; Recent reforms in financial sector.  
 
6. Marketing Management: 
Concept, evolution and scope; Marketing strategy formulation and components of marketing plan; Segmenting 
and targeting the market; Positioning and differen tiating the market offering; Analyzing competition; 
Analyzing consumer markets; Industrial buyer behaviour; Market research; Product strategy; Pricing strategies; 
Designing and managing Marketing channels; Integrated marketing communications; Building customer 
satisfaction, Value and retention; Services and non-profit marketing; Ethics in marketing; Consumer 
protection; Internet marketing; Retail management; Customer relationship management; Concept of holistic 
marketing. 
 
PAPER – II 
1. Quantitative Techniques in Decision Making: 
Descriptive statistics – tabular, graphical and numeri cal methods, introduction to  probability, discrete and 
continuous probability distributions, inferential statistics-sampling distributions, central limit theorem, 
hypothesis testing for differences between means and proportions, inference about population variances, Chi-
square and ANOVA, simple correlation and regression, time series and forecasting,  decision theory, index 
numbers; Linear programming – problem formulation, simplex method and graphical solution, sensitivity 
analysis. 
 
2. Production and Operations Management: 
Fundamentals of operations management; Organizing for production; Aggregate production planning, capacity 
planning, plant design: process planning, plant size and scale of operations, Management of facilities; Line 
balancing; Equipment replacement and maintenance; Pr oduction control; Supply chain management – vendor 
evaluation and audit; Quality management; Statistical process control, Six Sigma; Flexibility and agility in 
manufacturing systems; World class manufacturing; Project management concepts, R&D management, 
Management of service operations; Role and importance of materials management, value analysis, make or 
buy decision; Inventory control, MRP; Waste management.  
 
3. Management Information System: 
Conceptual foundations of information systems; Information theory; Information resource management; Types 
of information systems; Systems development – Overview of systems and design; System development 
management life-cycle, Designing for online and distributed environments; Implementation and control of 
project; Trends in information technology; Managing data resources - Organising data; DSS and RDBMS; 
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP), Expert systems,  e-Business architecture, e-Governance; Information 
systems planning, Flexibility in information systems; User involvement; Evaluation of information systems. 
 
4. Government Business Interface: 
State participation in business, Interaction between Government, Business and different Chambers of 
Commerce and Industry in India; Government’s policy with regard to Small Scale Industries; Government 
clearances for establishing a new enterprise; Public Di stribution System; Government control over price and 
distribution; Consumer Protection Act (CPA) and The Role of voluntary organizations in protecting 
consumers’ rights; New Industrial Policy of the Govern ment: liberalization, deregulation and privatisation; 
Indian planning system; Government policy concerning development of Backward areas/regions; The 
Responsibilities of the business as well as the Government to protect the environment; Corporate Governance; 
Cyber Laws.  
 
5. Strategic Management: 
Business policy as a field of study; Nature and scope of strategic management, Strategic intent, vision, 
objectives and policies; Process of strategic planning and implementation; Environmental analysis and internal 
analysis; SWOT analysis; Tools and techniques for strate gic analysis – Impact matrix: The experience curve, 
BCG matrix, GEC mode, Industry analysis, Concept of valu e chain; Strategic profile of a firm; Framework for 
analysing competition; Competitive advantage of a firm; Generic competitive strategies; Growth strategies – 
expansion, integration and diversification; Concept of core competence, Strategic flexibility; Reinventing 
strategy; Strategy and structure; Chief Executive and Board; Turnaround management; Management of 
strategic change; Strategic alliances, Mergers and Acquisitions; Strategy and corporate evolution in the Indian 
context. 
 
6. International Business: 
International Business Environment: Changing composition of trade in goods and services; India’s Foreign 
Trade: Policy and trends; Financing of Internati onal trade; Regional Economic Cooperation; FTAs; 
Internationalisation of service firms; International production; Operation Management in International 
companies; International Taxation; Global competitiveness and technological developments; Global e-
Business; Designing global organisational structure and control; Multicultural management; Global business 
strategy; Global marketing strategies; Export Management; Export- Import procedures; Joint Ventures; Foreign 
Investment: Foreign direct investment and foreign portfolio investment; Cross-border Mergers and 
--- PAGE 60 ---
Acquisitions; Foreign Exchange Risk Exposure Management; World Financial Markets and International 
Banking; External Debt Management; Country Risk Analysis.  
 
 
 
MATHEMATICS 
PAPER - I 
(1) Linear Algebra: 
Vector spaces over R and C, linear dependence and in dependence, subspaces, bases, dimension; Linear 
transformations, rank and nullity, matrix of a linear transformation. 
 
Algebra of Matrices; Row and column reduction, Echelon form, congruence’s and similarity; Rank of a matrix; 
Inverse of a matrix; Solution of system of linear equations; Eigenvalues and eigenvectors, characteristic 
polynomial, Cayley-Hamilton theorem, Symmetric, skew-s ymmetric, Hermitian, skew-Hermitian, orthogonal 
and unitary matrices and their eigenvalues. 
 
(2) Calculus: 
Real numbers, functions of a real variable, limits, c ontinuity, differentiability, meanvalue theorem, Taylor’s 
theorem with remainders, indeterminate forms, maxima and minima, asymptotes; Curve tracing; Functions of 
two or three variables: limits, continuity, partial derivatives, maxima and minima, Lagrange’s method of 
multipliers, Jacobian. 
 
Riemann’s definition of definite integrals; Indefinite integrals; Infinite and improper integrals; Double and 
triple integrals (evaluation techniques only); Areas, surface and volumes. 
 
(3) Analytic Geometry: 
Cartesian and polar coordinates in three dimensions, second degree equations in three variables, reduction to 
canonical forms, straight lines, shortest distance be tween two skew lines; Plane, sphere, cone, cylinder, 
paraboloid, ellipsoid, hyperboloid of one and two sheets and their properties.  
 
(4) Ordinary Differential Equations: 
Formulation of differential equations; Equations of first order and first degree, integrating factor; Orthogonal 
trajectory; Equations of first order but not of first degree, Clairaut’s equation, singular solution.  
 
Second and higher order linear equations with constant coefficients, complementary function, particular 
integral and general solution. 
 
Second order linear equations with variable coefficients, Euler-Cauchy equation; Determination of complete 
solution when one solution is known using method of variation of parameters. 
 
Laplace and Inverse Laplace transforms  and their properties; Laplace tran sforms of elementary functions. 
Application to initial value problems for 2nd order linear equations with constant coefficients. 
 
(5) Dynamics & Statics: 
Rectilinear motion, simple harmonic motion, motion in a plane, projectiles; constrained motion; Work and 
energy, conservation of energy; Kepler’s laws, orbits under central forces. 
 
Equilibrium of a system of particles; Work and potential energy, friction; common catenary; Principle of 
virtual work; Stability of equilibrium, equilibrium of forces in three dimensions. 
 
(6) Vector Analysis: 
Scalar and vector fields, differentiatio n of vector field of a scalar variab le; Gradient, divergence and curl in 
cartesian and cylindrical coordinates; Higher order derivatives; Vector identities and vector equations.  
 
Application to geometry: Curves in space, Curvature and torsion; Serret-Frenet’s formulae.  
Gauss and Stokes’ theorems, Green’s identities. 
PAPER - II 
(1) Algebra: 
Groups, subgroups, cyclic groups, cosets, Lagrange’s Theorem, normal subgroups, quotient groups, 
homomorphism of groups, basic isomorphism theorems, permutation groups, Cayley’s theorem.  
 
Rings, subrings and ideals, homomorphisms of rings; Integral domains, principal ideal domains, Euclidean 
domains and unique factorization domains; Fields, quotient fields. 
 
(2) Real Analysis: 
Real number system as an ordered field with least upper bound property; Sequences, limit of a sequence, 
Cauchy sequence, completeness of real line; Series an d its convergence, absolute and conditional convergence 
of series of real and complex terms, rearrangement of series.  
 
Continuity and uniform continuity of functions, properties of continuous functions on compact sets. 
Riemann integral, improper integrals; Fundamental theorems of integral calculus. 
--- PAGE 61 ---
Uniform convergence, continuity, differentiability and integrability for sequences and series of functions; 
Partial derivatives of functions of several (two or three) variables, maxima and minima. 
 
 
(3) Complex Analysis: 
Analytic functions, Cauchy-Riemann equations, Cauchy’s theorem, Cauchy’s integral formula, power series 
representation of an analytic function, Taylor’s seri es; Singularities; Laurent’s series; Cauchy’s residue 
theorem; Contour integration.  
 
(4) Linear Programming: 
Linear programming problems, basic solution, basic feasible solution and optimal solution; Graphical method 
and simplex method of solutions; Duality.  
 
Transportation and assignment problems. 
(5) Partial differential equations: 
Family of surfaces in three dimensions and formulation of partial differential equations; Solution of quasilinear 
partial differential equations of the first order, Cauchy’s method of characteristics; Linear partial differential 
equations of the second order with constant coefficients, canonical form; Equation of a vibrating string, heat 
equation, Laplace equation and their solutions. 
 
(6) Numerical Analysis and Computer programming: 
Numerical methods: Solution of algebraic and transcendental equations of one variable by bisection, Regula-
Falsi and Newton-Raphson methods; solution of system of linear equations by Gaussian elimination and 
Gauss-Jordan (direct), Gauss-Seidel(iterative) methods . Newton’s (forward and backward) interpolation, 
Lagrange’s interpolation.  
Numerical integration: Trapezoidal rule, Simpson’s rules, Gaussian quadrature formula.  
Numerical solution of ordinary differential equations: Euler and Runga Kutta-methods. Computer 
Programming: Binary system; Arithmetic and logical operations on numbers; Octal and Hexadecimal systems; 
Conversion to and from decimal systems; Algebra of binary numbers. 
 
Elements of computer systems and concept of memory; Basic logic gates and truth tables, Boolean algebra, 
normal forms.  
 
Representation of unsigned integers, signed integers and reals, double precision reals and long integers. 
Algorithms and flow charts for solving numerical analysis problems. 
(7) Mechanics and Fluid Dynamics: 
Generalized coordinates; D’ Alembert’s principle and Lagrange’s equations; Hamilton equations; Moment of 
inertia; Motion of rigid bodies in two dimensions.  
 
Equation of continuity; Euler’s equation of motion for inviscid flow; Stream-lines, path of a particle; Potential 
flow; Two-dimensional and axisymmetric motion; Sources and sinks, vortex motion; Navier-Stokes equation 
for a viscous fluid. 
 
MECHANICAL ENGINEERING 
PAPER - I 
1. Mechanics: 
1.1 Mechanics of rigid bodies: 
Equations of equilibrium in space and its application; first and second mo ments of area; simple problems on 
friction; kinematics of particles for plane motion; elementary particle dynamics. 
 
1.2 Mechanics of deformable bodies: 
Generalized Hooke’s law and its application; design pr oblems on axial stress, shear stress and bearing stress; 
material properties for dynamic loading; bending shear and stresses in beams;. determination of principle 
stresses and strains – analytical and graphical; compound and combined stresses; bi-axial stresses - thin walled 
pressure vessel; material behaviour and design factors for dynamic load; design of circular shafts for bending 
and torsional load only; deflection of beam for statically determinate problems; theories of failure. 
 
2. Engineering Materials: 
Basic concepts on structure of solids;  common ferrous and non-ferrous mate rials and their applications; heat-
treatment of steels; non-metals- plastics, ceramics, composite materials and nano-materials. 
 
3. Theory of Machines: 
Kinematic and dynamic analysis of plane mechanisms. Cams, Gears and epicyclic gear trains, flywheels, 
governors, balancing of rigid rotors, balancing of single and multicylinder engines, linear vibration analysis of 
mechanical systems (single degree of freedom), Critical speeds and whirling of shafts. 
 
4. Manufacturing Science: 
4.1 Manufacturing Process: 
--- PAGE 62 ---
Machine tool engineering – Merchant’s force analysis; Taylor’s tool life equation; conventional machining; 
NC and CNC machining process; jigs and fixtures.  
 
Non-conventional machining – EDM, ECM, ultrasonic, wa ter jet machining etc; application of lasers and 
plasmas; energy rate calculations. 
 
Forming and welding processes- standard processes. 
Metrology - concept of fits and tolerances; tools and gauges; comparators; inspection of length; position; 
profile and surface finish. 
 
4.2. Manufacturing Management: 
System design: factory location- simple OR models; plant layout - methods based; applications of engineering 
economic analysis and break- even analysis for product selection, process selection and capacity planning; 
predetermined time standards. 
 
System planning; forecasting methods based on regression and decompositio n, design and balancing of multi 
model andstochastic assembly lines; inventory management – probabilistic inventory models for order time 
and order quantity determination; JIT systems; strategic sourcing; managing inter plant logistics. 
 
System operations and control: Scheduling algorithms for job shops; applications of statistical methods for 
product and process quality control - applications of co ntrol charts for mean, range, percent defective, number 
of defectives and defects per unit; quality cost systems;  management of resources, organizations and risks in 
projects.  
 
System improvement: Implementation of systems, such as total quality management, developing and managing 
flexible, lean and agile organizations. 
 
PAPER - II 
1. Thermodynamics, Gas Dynamics and Turbine: 
1.1 Basic concept of First – law and second law of Thermodynamics; concept of entropy and reversibility; 
availability and unavailability and irreversibility. 
 
1.2 Classification and properties of fluids; incompressible and compressible fluids flows; effect of Mach 
number and compressibility; continuity momentum and energy equations; normal and oblique shocks; one 
dimensional isentropic flow; flow or fluids in duct with frictions that transfer. 
 
1.3 Flow through fans, blowers and compressors; axial and centrifugal flow configuration; design of fans and 
compressors; single problems compresses and turbine cascade ; open and closed cycle gas turbines; work done 
in the gas turbine; reheat and regenerators.  
 
2. Heat Transfer: 
2.1 Conduction heat transf er- general conduction equa tion - Laplace, Poisson and Fourier equations; Fourier 
law of conduction; one dimensional steady state heat conduction applied to simple wall, solid and hollow 
cylinder & spheres.  
 
2.2 Convection heat transfer- Newton’s law of convecti on; free and forces convection; heat transfer during 
laminar and turbulent flow of an incompressible fluid over a flat plate; concepts of Nusselt number, 
hydrodynamic and thermal boundary layer their thickness; Prandtl number; analogy between heat and 
momentum transferReynolds, Colbum, Prandtl analogies; heat transfer during laminar and turbulent flow 
through horizontal tubes; free convection from horizontal and vertical plates. 
 
2.3 Black body radiation - basic radiation laws such as Stefan-Boltzman, Planck distribution, Wein’s 
displacement etc. 
 
2.4 Basic heat exchanger analysis; classification of heat exchangers. 
3. I .C. Engines: 
3.1 Classification, thermodynamic cycles of operation; determination of break power, indicated power, 
mechanical efficiency, heat balance sheet, interpretation of performan ce characteristics, petrol, gas and diesel 
engines.  
 
3.2 Combustion in SI and CI engines, normal and abnormal combustion; effect of working parameters on 
knocking, reduction of knocking; Forms of combustion chamber for SI and CI engines; rating of fuels; 
additives; emission.  
 
3.3 Different systems of IC engines- fuels; lubricating; cooling and transmission systems. Alternate fuels in IC 
engines. 
 
4. Steam Engineering: 
4.1 Steam generation- modified Ra nkine cycle analysis; Modern stea m boilers; steam at critical and 
supercritical pressures; draught equipment; natural and artificial draught; boiler fuels solid, liquid and gaseous 
fuels. Steam turbines - principle; types; compounding; impulse and reaction turbines; axial thrust.  
 
4.2 Steam nozzles- flow of steam in  convergent and divergent nozzle; pressure at throat for maximum 
discharge with different initial steam conditions such as we t, saturated and superheated, effect of variation of 
back pressure; supersaturated flow of steam in nozzles, Wilson line. 
 
--- PAGE 63 ---
4.3 Rankine cycle with internal and external irreversibility; reheat factor; reheating and regeneration, methods 
of governing; back pressure and pass out turbines.  
 
4.4 Steam power plants - combined cycle power generation; heat recovery steam generators (HRSG) fired and 
unfired, co- generation plants.  
 
5. Refrigeration and air-conditioning: 
5.1 Vapour compression refrigeration cycle - cycle on p-H & T-s diagrams; eco-friendly refrigerants - 
R134a,123; Systems like evaporators, condensers, compressor, expansion devices. Simple vapour absorption 
systems. 
5.2 Psychrometry - properties; processes; charts; sensible heating and cooling; humidification and 
dehumidification effective temperature; air-conditioning load calculation; simple duct design. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MEDICAL SCIENCE 
PAPER - I 
1. Human Anatomy: 
Applied anatomy including blood and nerve supply of upper and lower limbs and joints of shoulder, hip and 
knee. 
 
Gross anatomy, blood supply and lymphatic drainage of tongue, thyroid, mammary gland, stomach, liver, 
prostate, gonads and uterus. 
 
Applied anatomy of diaphragm, perineum and inguinal region. 
Clinical anatomy of kidney, urinary bladder, uterine tubes, vas deferens. 
Embryology: Placenta and placental barrier. Development of hear t, gut, kidney, uterus, ovary, testis and their 
common congenital abnormalities. 
 
Central and peripheral au tonomic nervous system  : Gross and clinical anatom y of ventricles of brain, 
circulation of cerebrospinal fluid; Neural pathways and lesions of cutaneous sensations, hearing and vision; 
Cranial nerves, distribution and clinical significance; Components of autonomic nervous system. 
 
2. Human Physiology: 
Conduction and transmission of impulse, mechanism of contraction, neuromuscular transmission, reflexes, 
control of equilibrium, posture and muscle tone, descen ding pathways, functions of cerebellum, basal ganglia, 
Physiology of sleep and consciousness. 
 
Endocrine system: Mechanism of action of hormones, formation,  secretion, transport,  metabolism, function 
and regulation of secretion of pancreas and pituitary gland. 
 
Physiology of reproductive system: Menstrual cycle, lactation, pregnancy.  
Blood: Development, regulation and fate of blood cells. 
Cardio-vascular, cardiac output, blood pressure, regulation of cardiovascular functions; 
3. Biochemistry: 
Organ function tests-liver, kidney, thyroid Protein synthesis. 
Vitamins and minerals. 
Restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP). 
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR). 
Radio - immunoassays (RIA). 
4. Pathology: 
Inflammation and repair, disturbances of growth and cancer, Pathogenesis and histopathology of rheumatic and 
ischemic heart disease and diabetes mellitus. Di fferentiation between benign, malignant, primary and 
metastatic malignancies, Pathogenesis and histopathology of bronchogenic carcinoma, carcinoma breast, oral 
cancer, cancer cervix, leukemia, Etiology, pathogenesis and histopathology of cirrhosis liver, 
glomerulonephritis, tuberculosis, acute osteomyelitis. 
 
5. Microbiology: 
Humoral and cell mediated immunity Diseases caused by and laboratory diagnosis of - 
 Meningococcus, Salmonella 
 Shigella, Herpes, Dengue, Polio 
 HIV/AIDS, Malaria, E. Histolytica, Giardia 
 Candida, Cryptococcus, Aspergillus 
6. Pharmacology: 
--- PAGE 64 ---
Mechanism of action and side effects of the following drugs 
 Antipyretics and analgesics, Antibiotics, Antimalaria; Antikala-azar,Antidiabetics 
 Antihypertensive, Antidiuretics, General and cardiac vasodilators, Antiviral, Antiparasitic, 
Antifungal,    Immunosuppressants 
 
 Anticancer 
7. Forensic Medicine and Toxicology: 
Forensic examination of injuries and wounds; Examination of blood and seminal stains; poisoning, sedative 
overdose, hanging, drowning, burns, DNA and finger print study. 
 
PAPER - II 
1. General Medicine: 
Etiology, clinical features, diagnosis and principles of management (including prevention) of: - Tetanus, 
Rabies, AIDS, Dengue, Kala-azar, Japanese Encephalitis.  
 
Etiology, clinical features, diagnosis and principles of management of:  Ischaemic heart disease, pulmonary 
embolism.  
 
Bronchial asthma. 
Pleural effusion, tuberculosis, Malabsorption syndromes,  acid peptic diseases, Viral hepatitis and cirrhosis of 
liver.  
 
Glomerulonerphritis and pyelonephritis, renal failure , nephrotic syndrome, renovascular hypertension, 
complications of diabetes mellitus, coagulation disorders, leukemia, Hypo and hyper thyrodism, meningitis and 
encephalitis.  
 
Imaging in medical problems, ultrasound, echocardiogram, CT scan, MRI. 
Anxiety and Depressive Psychosis and schizophrenia and ECT. 
2. Pediatrics: 
Immunization, Baby friendly hospital, congenital cyanotic heart disease, respiratory distress syndrome, 
broncho - pneumonias, kernicterus. IMNCI classifica tion and management, PEM grading and management.  
ARI and Diarrhea of under five and their management. 
 
3. Dermatology: 
Psoriasis, Allergic dermatitis, scabies, eczema, vitiligo, Stevan Johnson’s syndrome, Lichen Planus. 
4. General Surgery: 
Clinical features, causes, diagnosis and principles of management of cleft palate, harelip. 
Laryngeal tumor, oral and esophageal tumors. 
Peripheral arterial diseases, varicose veins, coarctation of aorta.  
Tumors of Thyroid, Adrenal Glands.  
Abscess, cancer, fibroadenoma and adenosis of breast. 
Bleeding peptic ulcer, tuberculosis of bowel, ulcerative colitis, cancer stomach. 
Renal mass,cancer Prostate. 
Haemothorax, stones of Gall bladder, Kidney, Ureter and Urinary Bladder. 
Management of surgical conditions of Rectum, Anus and Anal canal, Gall bladder and Bile ducts.  
Splenomegaly, cholecystitis, portal hypertension, liver abscess, peritonitis, carcinoma head of pancreas. 
Fractures of spine, Colles’ fracture and bone tumors. 
Endoscopy. 
Laprascopic Surgery. 
5. Obstetrics and Gynaecology including Family Planning: 
Diagnosis of pregnancy. 
Labour management, complications of 3
rd stage, Antepartum and postpartum hemorrhage, resuscitation of the 
newborn, Management of abnormal lie and difficult labour, Management of small for date or premature 
newborn. 
 
Diagnosis and management of anemia. Preeclampsia a nd Toxaemias of pregnancy,  Management of Post 
menopausal Syndrome.   
 
Intra-uterine devices, pills, tubectomy and vasectomy. Medical termination of pregnancy including legal 
aspects. 
Cancer cervix. 
Leucorrhoea, pelvic pain, infertility, dysfunctional uterine bleeding (DUB), amenorrhoea, Fibroid and prolapse 
of uterus. 
 
6. Community Medicine (Preventive and Social Medicine): 
--- PAGE 65 ---
Principles, methods, approach and measurements of Epidemiology. 
Nutrition, nutritional diseases / disorders & Nutrition Programmes.  
Health information Collection, Analysis and Presentation. 
Objectives, components and critical analysis of National programmes for control/eradication of: 
Malaria, Kala-azar, Filaria and Tuberculosis, HIV/AIDS , STDs and Dengue Critical appraisal of Health care 
delivery system. 
 
Health management and administration: Techniques, Tools, Programme Implementation and Evaluation. 
Objective, Component, Goals and Status of Reproductive and Child Health, National Rural Health Mission and 
Millennium Development Goals. 
 
Management of hospital and industrial waste. 
 
 
PHILOSOPHY 
PAPER - I 
History and Problems of Philosophy: 
1. Plato and Aristotle: Ideas; Substance; Form and Matter; Causation; Actuality and Potentiality. 
2. Rationalism (Descartes, Spinoza, Leibniz): Cartesian Method and Certain Knowledge; Substance; God; 
Mind-Body Dualism; Determinism and Freedom. 
 
3. Empiricism (Locke, Berkeley, Hume): Theory of  Knowledge; Substance and Qualities; Self and God; 
Scepticism.  
 
4. Kant: Possibility of Synthetic a priori Judgments; Space and Time ; Categories; Ideas of Reason; 
Antinomies; Critique of Proofs for the Existence of God  
 
5. Hegel: Dialectical Method; Absolute Idealism 
6. Moore, Russell and Early Wittgenstein: Defence of Commonsense; Refutation of Idealism; Logical 
Atomism; Logical Constructions; Incomplete Symbols; Picture Theory of Meaning; Saying and Showing.  
 
7. Logical Positivism: Verification Theory of Meaning; Rejection of Metaphysics; Linguistic Theory of 
Necessary Propositions. 
 
8. Later Wittgenstein: Meaning and Use; Language-games; Critique of Private Language. 
9. Phenomenology (Husserl): Method; Theory of Essences; Avoidance of Psychologism. 
10. Existentialism (Kierkegaard, Sartre, Heidegger): Existence and Essence; Choice, Responsibility and 
Authentic Existence; Being-in-the –world and Temporality. 
 
11. Quine and Strawson: Critique of Empiricism; Theory of Basic Particulars and Persons. 
12. Cârvâka : Theory of Knowledge; Rejection of Transcendent Entities. 
13. Jainism: Theory of Reality; Saptabhaòginaya; Bondage and Liberation.  
14. Schools of Buddhism: Pratîtyasamutpâda; Ksanikavada, Nairâtmyavâda. 
15. Nyâya- Vaiúesika: Theory of Ca tegories; Theory of Appearance; Theo ry of Pramâna; Self, Liberation; 
God; Proofs for the Existence of God; Theory of Causation; Atomistic Theory of Creation.  
 
16. Sâmkhya: Prakrti; Purusa; Causation; Liberation. 
17. Yoga: Citta; Cittavrtti; Klesas; Samadhi; Kaivalya. 
18. Mimâmsâ: Theory of Knowledge. 
19. Schools of Vedânta: Brahman; Îúvara; Âtman; Jiva; Jagat; Mâyâ; Avidyâ; Adhyâsa; Moksa; 
Aprthaksiddhi; Pancavidhabheda  
 
20. Aurobindo: Evolution, Involution; Integral Yoga. 
PAPER – II 
Socio-Political Philosophy 
1. Social and Political Ideals: Equality, Justice, Liberty. 
2. Sovereignty: Austin, Bodin, Laski, Kautilya. 
3. Individual and State: Rights; Duties and Accountability. 
4. Forms of Government: Monarchy; Theocracy and Democracy. 
5. Political Ideologies: Anarchism; Marxism and Socialism. 
6. Humanism; Secularism; Multiculturalism. 
7. Crime and Punishment: Corruption, Mass Violence, Genocide, Capital Punishment. 
8. Development and Social Progress. 
9. Gender Discrimination: Female Foeticide, Land and Property Rights; Empowernment. 
--- PAGE 66 ---
10. Caste Discrimination: Gandhi and Ambedkar  
Philosophy of Religion: 
1. Notions of God: Attributes; Relation to Man and the World. (Indian and Western). 
2. Proofs for the Existence of God and their Critique (Indian and Western). 
3. Problem of Evil. 
4. Soul: Immortality; Rebirth and Liberation. 
5. Reason, Revelation and Faith. 
6. Religious Experience: Nature and Object (Indian and Western). 
7. Religion without God. 
8. Religion and Morality. 
9. Religious Pluralism and the Problem of Absolute Truth. 
10. Nature of Religious Language: Analogical and Symbolic; Cognitivist and Noncognitive. 
PHYSICS 
PAPER - I 
1. (a) Mechanics of Particles: 
Laws of motion; conservation of energy and momentum, applications to rotating frames, centripetal and 
Coriolis accelerations; Motion under a central force; Conservation of angular momentum, Kepler’s laws; 
Fields and potentials; Gravitational field and potential due to spherical bodies, Gauss and Poisson equations, 
gravitational self-energy; Two-body problem; Reduced mass; Rutherford scattering; Centre of mass and 
laboratory reference 
frames. 
(b) Mechanics of Rigid Bodies: 
System of particles; Centre of mass, angular momentum, equations of motion; Conservation theorems for 
energy, momentum and angular momentum; Elastic and inelastic collisions; Rigid body; Degrees of freedom, 
Euler’s theorem, angular velocity, angular momentum, moments of inertia, theorems of parallel and 
perpendicular axes, equation of motion for rotation; Molecular rotations (as rigid bodies); Di and tri-atomic 
molecules; Precessional motion; top, gyroscope.  
 
(c) Mechanics of Continuous Media: 
Elasticity, Hooke’s law and elastic constants of isotro pic solids and their inter-rela tion; Streamline (Laminar) 
flow, viscosity, Poiseuille’s equation, Bernoulli’s equation, Stokes’ law and applications. 
 
(d) Special Relativity: 
Michelson-Morley experiment and its implications; Lorentz transformations-length contraction, time dilation, 
addition of relativistic velocities, aberration and Doppler effect, mass-energy relation, simple applications to a 
decay process; Four dimensional momentum vector; Covariance of equations of physics. 
 
2. Waves and Optics:  
(a) Waves: 
Simple harmonic motion, damped oscillation, forced oscillation and resonance; Beats; Stationary waves in a 
string; Pulses and wave packets; Phase and group velocities; Reflection and Refraction from Huygens’ 
principle. 
 
(b) Geometrical Optics: 
Laws of reflection and refraction from Fermat’s principle; Matrix method in paraxial optics-thin lens formula, 
nodal planes, system of two thin lenses, chromatic and spherical aberrations. 
 
(c) Interference: 
Interference of light-Young’s experiment, Newton’s rings, interference by thin films, Michelson 
interferometer; Multiple beam interference and Fabry-Perot interferometer. 
 
(d) Diffraction: 
Fraunhofer diffraction-single slit, doubl e slit, diffraction grating, resolvi ng power; Diffraction by a circular 
aperture and the Airy pattern; Fresnel diffraction: half-period zones and zone plates, circular aperture. 
 
(e) Polarization and Modern Optics: 
Production and detection of linearly and circularly pola rized light; Double refraction, quarter wave plate; 
Optical activity; Principles of fibre optics, attenuation; Pulse dispersion in step index and parabolic index 
fibres; Material dispersion, single mode fibres; Lasers-Einstein A and B coefficients; Ruby and He-Ne lasers; 
Characteristics of laser light-spatial and temporal coheren ce; Focusing of laser beams; Three-level scheme for 
laser operation; Holography and simple applications. 
 
3. Electricity and Magnetism: 
(a) Electrostatics and Magnetostatics: 
Laplace and Poisson equations in electrostatics and their applications; Energy of a system of charges, multipole 
expansion of scalar potential; Method of images and its applications; Potential and field due to a dipole, force 
and torque on a dipole in an external field; Dielectrics, polarization; Solutions to boundary-value problems-
--- PAGE 67 ---
conducting and dielectric spheres in a uniform electric field; Magnetic shell, uniformly magnetized sphere; 
Ferromagnetic materials, hysteresis, energy loss. 
 
(b) Current Electricity: 
Kirchhoff’s laws and their applicatio ns; Biot-Savart law, Ampere’s law, Faraday’s law, Lenz’ law; Self-and 
mutual-inductances; Mean and r m s values in AC circuits; DC and AC circuits with R, L and C components; 
Series and parallel resonances; Quality factor; Principle of transformer. 
 
4. Electromagnetic Waves and Blackbody Radiation: 
Displacement current and Maxwell’s equations; Wave eq uations in vacuum, Poynting theorem; Vector and 
scalar potentials; Electromagnetic field tensor, covariance of Maxwell’s equations; Wave equations in isotropic 
dielectrics, reflection and refraction at the boundary of  two dielectrics; Fresnel’s relations; Total internal 
reflection; Normal and anomalous dispersion; Rayleigh scattering; Blackbody radiation and Planck’s radiation 
law, StefanBoltzmann law, Wien’s displacement law and Rayleigh-Jeans’ law. 
 
5. Thermal and Statistical Physics: 
(a) Thermodynamics: 
Laws of thermodynamics, reversible and irreversible processes, entropy; Isothermal, adiabatic, isobaric, 
isochoric processes and entropy changes; Otto and Diesel engines, Gibbs’ phase rule and chemical potential; 
van der Waals equation of state of a real gas, critical constants; Maxwell-Boltzman distribution of molecular 
velocities, transport phenomena, equipartition and virial theorems; Dulong-Petit, Einstein, and Debye’s 
theories of specific heat of solids; Maxwell relations and applications; Clausius- Clapeyron equation; Adiabatic 
demagnetisation, Joule-Kelvin effect and liquefaction of gases.  
 
(b) Statistical Physics: 
Macro and micro states, statistical distributions, Maxwell-Boltzmann, Bose-Einstein and Fermi-Dirac 
distributions, applications to specific heat of gases and blackbody radiation; Concept of negative temperatures. 
 
PAPER - II 
1. Quantum Mechanics: 
Wave-particle dualitiy; Schroedinger equation and expectation values; Uncertainty principle; Solutions of the 
one-dimensional Schroedinger equation for a free particle (Gaussian wave-packet), particle in a box, particle in 
a finite well, linear harmonic oscillator; Reflection and transmission by a step potential and by a rectangular 
barrier; Particle in a three dimensional box, density  of states, free electron theory of metals; Angular 
momentum; Hydrogen atom; Spin half particles, properties of Pauli spin matrices. 
 
2. Atomic and Molecular Physics: 
Stern-Gerlach experiment, electron spin, fine structure of hydrogen atom; L-S coupling, J-J coupling; 
Spectroscopic notation of atomic states; Zeeman effec t; FrankCondon principle and applications; Elementary 
theory of rotational, vibratonal and electronic spectra of diatomic molecules; Raman effect and molecular 
structure; Laser Raman spectroscopy; Importance of neutral hydrogen atom, molecular hydrogen and 
molecular hydrogen ion in astronomy; Fluorescence and Phosphorescence; Elementary theory and applications 
of NMR and EPR; Elementary ideas about Lamb shift and its significance. 
 
3. Nuclear and Particle Physics: 
Basic nuclear properties-size, bindin g energy, angular momentum, parity, magnetic moment; Semi-empirical 
mass formula and applications, mass parabolas; Ground state of deuteron, magnetic moment and non-central 
forces; Meson theory of nuclear for ces; Salient features of nuclear fo rces; Shell model of the nucleus - 
successes and limitations; Violation of parity in beta decay; Gamma decay and internal conversion; Elementary 
ideas about Mossbauer spectroscopy; Q-value of nuclear reactions; Nu clear fission and fusion, energy 
production in stars; Nuclear reactors.  
 
Classification of elementary particles and their interactions; Conservation laws; Quark structure of hadrons; 
Field quanta of electroweak and strong  interactions; Elementary ideas abou t unification of forces; Physics of 
neutrinos. 
 
4. Solid State Physics, Devices and Electronics: 
Crystalline and amorphous structure of matter; Diff erent crystal systems, space groups; Methods of 
determination of crystal structure; X-ray diffraction, scanning and transmission electron microscopies; Band 
theory of solids - conductors, insulators and semiconductors; Thermal properties of solids, specific heat, Debye 
theory; Magnetism: dia, para and ferromagnetism; Elements of superconductivity, Meissner effect, Josephson 
junctions and applications; Elementary ideas about high temperature superconductivity.  
 
Intrinsic and extrinsic semiconductors; p-n-p and n-p-n tr ansistors; Amplifiers and oscillators; Op-amps; FET, 
JFET and MOSFET; Digital electronics-Boolean identities, De Morgan’s laws, logic gates and truth tables; 
Simple logic circuits; Thermistors, solar cells; Fundamentals of microprocessors and digital computers. 
 
POLITICAL SCIENCE AND INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS 
PAPER - I 
Political Theory and Indian Politics: 
1. Political Theory: meaning and approaches. 
2. Theories of the State: Liberal, Neoliberal, Marxist, Pluralist, Post-colonial and feminist. 
--- PAGE 68 ---
3. Justice: Conceptions of justice with special referenc e to Rawl’s theory of justice and its communitarian 
critiques. 
 
4. Equality: Social, political and economic; relationship between equality and freedom; Affirmative action. 
5. Rights: Meaning and theories; different kinds of rights; concept of Human Rights. 
6. Democracy: Classical and contemporary theories; different models of democracy – representative, 
participatory and deliberative. 
 
7. Concept of power, hegemony, ideology and legitimacy. 
8. Political Ideologies: Liberalism, Socialism, Marxism, Fascism, Gandhism and Feminism. 
9. Indian Political Thought : Dharamshastra, Arthashastra and Buddhist traditions; Sir Syed Ahmed Khan, Sri 
Aurobindo, M.K. Gandhi, B.R. Ambedkar, M.N. Roy. 
10. Western Political Thought: Plato, Aristotle, Machiave lli, Hobbes, Locke, John S. Mill, Marx, Gramsci, 
Hannah Arendt. 
 
Indian Government and Politics: 
1. Indian Nationalism: 
(a) Political Strategies of India’s Freedom Struggle: Constitutionalism to mass Satyagraha, Non-cooperation, 
Civil Disobedience; Militant and revolutionary movements, Peasant and workers’ movements. 
 
(b) Perspectives on Indian National Movement: Liberal, Socialist and Marxist; Radical humanist and Dalit. 
2. Making of the Indian Constitution: Legacies of the British rule; different social and political perspectives. 
3. Salient Features of the Indian Constitution: Th e Preamble, Fundamental Rights and Duties, Directive 
Principles; Parliamentary System and Amendment Procedures; Judicial Review and Basic Structure doctrine. 
 
4. (a) Principal Organs of the Union Government: Envisaged role and actual working of the Executive, 
Legislature and Supreme Court. 
 
     (b) Principal Organs of the State Government: Envisaged role and actual working of the Executive,   
Legislature and High Courts. 
 
5. Grassroots Democracy: Panchayati Raj and Municipal Government; significance of 73rd and 74th 
Amendments; Grassroot movements. 
 
6. Statutory Institutions/Commissions: Election Commission, Comptroller and Auditor General, Finance 
Commission, Union Public Service Commission, National Commission for Scheduled Castes, National 
Commission for Scheduled Tribes, National Commission for Women; National Human Rights Commission, 
National Commission for Minorities, National Backward Classes Commission. 
 
7. Federalism: Constitutional provisions; changing nature of centre-state relations; integrationist tendencies and 
regional aspirations; inter-state disputes.  
 
8. Planning and Economic Development : Nehruvian and Gandhian perspectives; role of planning and public 
sector; Green Revolution, land reforms and agrarian relations; liberalilzation and economic reforms. 
 
9. Caste, Religion and Ethnicity in Indian Politics. 
10. Party System: National and regional political parties, ideological and social bases of parties; patterns of 
coalition politics; Pressure groups, trends in electoral behaviour; changing socio- economic profile of 
Legislators.  
 
11. Social Movements: Civil liberties and human rights movements; women’s movements; environmentalist 
movements.  
 
PAPER – II 
Comparative Politics and International Relations 
Comparative Political Analysis and International Politics: 
1. Comparative Politics: Nature and major approaches; political economy and political sociology perspectives; 
limitations of the comparative method.  
 
2. State in comparative perspective: Characteristics and changing nature of  the State in capitalist and socialist 
economies, and, advanced industrial and developing societies. 
 
3. Politics of Representation and Participation: Political parties, pressure groups and social movements in 
advanced industrial and developing societies. 
 
4. Globalisation: Responses from developed and developing societies. 
5. Approaches to the Study of International Relations : Idealist, Realist, Marxist, Functionalist and Systems 
theory. 
 
6. Key concepts in International Relations: National interest, Security and power; Balance of power and 
deterrence; Transnational actors and collective security; World capitalist economy and globalisation. 
 
7. Changing International Political Order:  
--- PAGE 69 ---
    (a) Rise of super powers; strategic and ideological Bipolarity, arms race and Cold War; nuclear threat; 
    (b) Non-aligned movement: Aims and achievements;  
    (c) Collapse of the Soviet Union; Unipolarity and American hegemony; relevance of non-alignment in the 
contemporary world. 
 
8. Evolution of the International Economic System: Fr om Brettonwoods to WTO; Socialist economies and the 
CMEA (Council for Mutual Economic Assistance); Third World demand for new international economic 
order; Globalisation of the world economy. 
 
9. United Nations: Envisaged role and actual record; specialized UN agencies-aims and functioning; need for 
UN reforms. 
 
10. Regionalisation of World Politics: EU, ASEAN, APEC, SAARC, NAFTA.  
11. Contemporary Global Concerns: Democracy, human rights, environment, gender justice, terrorism, nuclear 
proliferation. 
 
India and the World: 
1. Indian Foreign Policy: Determinants of foreign policy; institutions of policy-making; continuity and change. 
2. India’s Contribution to the Non-Alignment Movement: Different phases; current role. 
3. India and South Asia:  
   (a) Regional Co-operation: SAARC – past performance and future prospects. 
   (b) South Asia as a Free Trade Area. 
   (c) India’s “Look East” policy. 
   (d) Impediments to regional co-operation: river water disputes; illegal cross-border migration; ethnic 
conflicts   and insurgencies; border disputes. 
 
4. India and the Global South: Relations with Africa and Latin America; leadersh ip role in the demand for 
NIEO and WTO negotiations. 
 
5. India and the Global Centres of Power: USA, EU, Japan, China and Russia. 
6. India and the UN System: Role in UN Peace-keeping; demand for Permanent Seat in the Security Council. 
7. India and the Nuclear Question: Changing perceptions and policy. 
8. Recent developments in Indian Fo reign policy: India’s position on the recent crisis in Afghanistan, Iraq and 
West Asia, growing relations with US and Israel; vision of a new world order. 
 
PSYCHOLOGY 
PAPER - I 
Foundations of Psychology 
1. Introduction: 
Definition of Psychology; Historical antecedents of Psychology and trends in the 21st century; Psychology and 
scientific methods; Psychology in relation to other social sciences and natural sciences; Application of 
Psychology to societal problems. 
 
2. Methods of Psychology: 
Types of research: Descriptive, evaluative, diagnostic and prognostic; Methods of Research: Survey, 
observation, case-study and experiments; Characteristics of experimental design and non-experimental design, 
Quasi-experimental designs; Focussed group discussions, brain storming, grounded theory approach. 
 
3. Research Methods: 
Major steps in Psychological research (problem statement, hypothesis formulation, research designs, sampling, 
tools of data collection, analysis and interpretation an d report writing) Fundamental versus applied research; 
Methods of data collection (interview, observation, questionnaire); Research designs (ex-post facto and 
experimental); Application of statistical technique (t - test, two way ANOVA correlation, regression and factor 
analysis); Item response theory. 
 
4. Development of Human Behaviour: 
Growth and development; Principles of development, Role of genetic and environmental factors in determining 
human behaviour; Influence of cultural factors in socialization; Life span development Characteristics, 
development tasks, promoting psychological well-being across major stages of the life span. 
 
5. Sensation, Attention and Perception: 
Sensation: concepts of threshold, absolute and difference thresholds, signal-detection and vigilance; Factors 
influencing attention including set and characteristics of stimulus; Definition and concept of perception, 
biological factors in perception; Perceptual organization-influence of past experiences, perceptual defence-
factors influencing space and depth perception, size estimation and per ceptual readiness; The plasticity of 
perception; Extrasensory perception; Culture and perception, Subliminal perception. 
 
6. Learning: 
Concept and theories of learning (Behaviourists, Ge staltalist and Information processing models); The 
Processes of extinction, discrimination and generaliza tion; Programmed learning, probability learning, self-
--- PAGE 70 ---
instructional learning, concepts; Types and the schedules of reinforcement, escape, avoidance and punishment, 
modeling and social learning. 
 
7. Memory: 
Encoding and remembering; Short term memory, Long term memory, Sensory memory, Iconic memory, 
Echoic memory: The Multistore model, levels of processing; Organization and Mnemonic techniques to 
improve memory; Theories of forge tting: decay, interference and retrie val failure: Metamemory; Amnesia: 
Anterograde and retrograde. 
 
8. Thinking and Problem Solving: 
Piaget’s theory of cognitive development; Concept formation processes; Information processing, Reasoning 
and problem solving, Facilitating and hindering factors in problem solving, Methods of problem solving: 
Creative thinking and fostering creativity; Factors influencing decision making and judgment; Recent trends.  
 
9. Motivation and Emotion: 
Psychological and physiological basis of motivation and emotion; Measurement of motivation and emotion; 
Effects of motivation and emotion on behaviour; Extrinsic and intrinsic motivation; Factors influencing 
intrinsic motivation; Emotional competence and the related issues. 
 
10. Intelligence and Aptitude: 
Concept of intelligence and aptitude, Nature and theories of intelligence Spearman, Thurstone, Gullford 
Vernon, 
Sternberg and J.P; Das; Emotional Intelligence, Social intelligence, measurement of intelligence and aptitudes, 
concept of IQ, deviation IQ, constancy of IQ; Meas urement of multiple intelligence; Fluid intelligence and 
crystallized intelligence.  
 
11. Personality: 
Definition and concept of personality; Theories of pers onality (psychoanalytical, sociocultural, interpersonal, 
developmental, humanistic, behaviouristic, trait and type approaches); Measurement of personality (projective 
tests, pencil-paper test); The Indian approach to personality; Training for personality development; Latest 
approaches like big 5 factor theory; The notion of self in different traditions. 
 
12. Attitudes, Values and Interests: 
Definition of attitudes, values and in terests; Components of attitudes; Formation and maintenance of attitudes; 
Measurement of attitudes, values and interests; Theories  of attitude change; Strategies for fostering values; 
Formation of stereotypes and prejudices; Changing others behaviour; Theories of attribution; Recent trends. 
 
13. Language and Communication:  
Human language - Properties, struct ure and linguistic hierarchy, Languag e acquisition-predisposition, critical 
period hypothesis; Theories of language development Skinner and Chomsky; Process and types of 
communication - effective communication training. 
 
14. Issues and Perspectives in Modern Contemporary Psychology: 
Computer application in the psychological laboratory  and psychological testing; Artificial intelligence; 
Psychocybernetics; Study of consciousness-sleep-wake schedules; dreams, stimulus deprivation, meditation, 
hypnotic/drug induced states; Extrasensory perception; Intersensory perceptionSimulation studies. 
 
PAPER - II 
Psychology: Issues and Applications  
1. Psychological Measurement of Individual Differences: 
The nature of individual differences; Characteristics and construction of standardized psychological tests; 
Types of psychological tests; Use, misuse and limitation of psychological tests; hical issues in the use of 
psychological tests. 
 
2. Psychological well being and Mental Disorders: 
Concept of health-ill health; Positive health, well being; Causal factors in mental disorders (Anxiety disorders, 
mood disorders, schizophrenia and delu sional disorders; personality diso rders, substance abuse disorders); 
Factors influencing positive health, well being, life style and quality of life; Happiness disposition. 
 
3. Therapeutic Approaches: 
Psychodynamic therapies; Behaviour therapies; Client  centered therapy; Cognitive therapies; Indigenous 
therapies (Yoga, Meditation); Bio-feedback therapy; Prevention and rehabilitation of the mentally ill; Fostering 
mental health. 
 
4. Work Psychology and Organisational Behaviour: 
Personnel selection and training; Use of psychological tests in the industry; Training and human resource 
development; Theories of work motivation – Herzberg, Maslow, Adam Equity theory, Porter and Lawler, 
Vroom; Leadership and participatory management; Advertising and marketing; Stress and its management; 
Ergonomics; consumer psychology; Managerial effect iveness; Transformational leadership; Sensitivity 
training; Power and politics in organizations. 
 
5. Application of Psychology to Educational Field: 
--- PAGE 71 ---
Psychological principles underlying ef fective teaching-learning process; L earning styles; Gifted, retarded, 
learning disabled and their training; Training for improving memory and better academic achievement; 
Personality development and value education, Educationa l, vocational guidance and ca reer counseling; Use of 
psychological tests in educational institutions; Effective strategies in guidance programmes. 
 
6. Community Psychology: 
Definition and concept of community psychology; Use of small groups in social action; Arousing community 
consciousness and action for handling social problems;  Group decision making an d leadership for social 
change; Effective strategies for social change. 
 
7. Rehabilitation Psychology: 
Primary, secondary and tertiary prevention programmes-role of psychologists; Organising of services for 
rehabilitation of physically, mentally and socially challenged persons including old persons, Rehabilitation of 
persons suffering from substance abuse, juvenile delinque ncy, criminal behaviour; Rehabilitation of victims of 
violence, Rehabilitation of HIV/AIDS victims, the role of social agencies.  
 
8. Application of Psychology to disadvantaged groups: 
The concepts of disadvantaged, deprivation; Social , physical, cultural and economic consequences of 
disadvantaged and deprived groups; Educating and motivating the disadvantaged towards development; 
Relative and prolonged deprivation. 
 
9. Psychological problems of social integration: 
The concept of social integration; The problem of caste, class, religion and language conflicts and prejudice; 
Nature and manifestation of prejudice between the in-group and out-group; Causal factors of social conflicts 
and prejudices; Psychological strategies for handling the conflicts and prejudices; M easures to achieve social 
integration.  
 
10. Application of Psychology in Information Technology and Mass Media: 
The present scenario of information technology and the mass media boom and the role of psychologists; 
Selection and training of psychology professionals to work in the field of IT and mass media; Distance learning 
through IT and mass media; Entrepreneurship through e-commerce; Multilevel marketing; Impact of TV and 
fostering value through IT and mass media; Psychol ogical consequences of recent developments in 
Information Technology.  
 
11. Psychology and Economic development: 
Achievement motivation and economic development; Characteristics of entrepreneurial behaviour; Motivating 
and training people for entrepreneurship and economic development; Consumer rights and consumer 
awareness, Government policies for promotion of entrepreneurship among youth including women 
entrepreneurs. 
 
12. Application of psychology to environment and related fields: 
Environmental psychology-effects of noise, pollution and crowding; Population psychology: psychological 
consequences of population explosion and high population density; Motivating for small family norm; Impact 
of rapid scientific and technological growth on degradation of environment.  
 
13. Application of psychology in other fields: 
(a) Military Psychology 
Devising psychological tests for defence personnel for use in selection, Training, counseling; training 
psychologists to work with defence personnel in promoting positive health; Human engineering in defence. 
 
(b) Sports Psychology 
Psychological interventions in improving performance of athletes and sports. Persons participating in 
Individual and Team Games. 
 
(c) Media influences on pro and antisocial behaviour. 
(d) Psychology of terrorism. 
14. Psychology of Gender: 
Issues of discrimination, Management of diversity; Glass ceiling effect, Self fulfilling prophesy, Women and 
Indian society. 
 
PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 
PAPER – I 
Administrative Theory 
1. Introduction: 
Meaning, scope and significance of Public Administration; Wilson’s vision of Public Administration; 
Evolution of the discipline and its present status; New Public Administration; Public Choice approach; 
Challenges of liberalization, Privatisation, Globalisa tion; Good Governance: concept and application; New 
Public Management. 
 
2. Administrative Thought: 
Scientific Management and Scientific Management m ovement; Classical Theory; Weber’s bureaucratic model 
– its critique and post-Weberian Developments; Dynamic Administration (Mary Parker Follett); Human 
--- PAGE 72 ---
Relations School (Elton Mayo and others); Functions of the Executive (C.I. Barnard); Simon’s decision-
making theory; Participative Management (R. Likert, C. Argyris, D. McGregor). 
 
3. Administrative Behaviour: 
Process and techniques of decision-making; Communication; Morale; Motivation Theories – content, process 
and contemporary; Theories of Leadership: Traditional and Modern. 
 
4. Organisations: 
Theories – systems, contingency; Structure and forms: Ministries and Departments, Corporations, Companies, 
Boards and Commissions; Ad hoc and advisory bodies; Headquarters and Field relationships; Regulatory 
Authorities; Public – Private Partnerships. 
 
5. Accountability and control: 
Concepts of accountability and control; Legislative, Executive and Judicial control over administration; Citizen 
and Administration; Role of media, interest groups, vo luntary organizations; Civil society; Citizen’s Charters; 
Right to Information; Social audit. 
 
6. Administrative Law: 
Meaning, scope and significance; Dicey on Administrative law; Delegated legislation; Administrative 
Tribunals. 
7. Comparative Public Administration: 
Historical and sociological factors affecting administ rative systems; Administration and politics in different 
countries; Current status of Comparative Public Administration; Ecology and administration; Riggsian models 
and their critique.  
 
8. Development Dynamics: 
Concept of development; Changing profile of development administration; ‘Antidevelopment thesis’; 
Bureaucracy and development; Strong state versus the market debate; Impact of liberalisation on 
administration 
in developing countries; Women and development - the self-help group movement. 
 
9. Personnel Administration: 
Importance of human resource development; Recrui tment, training, career advancement, position 
classification, discipline, performance appraisal, promotion, pay and service conditions; employer-employee 
relations, grievance redressal mechanism; Code of conduct; Administrative ethics. 
 
10. Public Policy: 
Models of policy-making and their critique; Processes of conceptualisation, planning, implementation, 
monitoring, evaluation and review and their limitations; State theories and public policy formulation. 
 
11. Techniques of Administrative Improvement: 
Organisation and methods, Work study and work management; e-governance and information technology; 
Management aid tools like network analysis, MIS, PERT, CPM. 
 
12. Financial Administration: 
Monetary and fiscal policies; Public borrowings and public debt Budgets – types and forms; Budgetary 
process; Financial accountability; Accounts and audit. 
 
PAPER - II 
Indian Administration 
1. Evolution of Indian Administration: 
Kautilya’s Arthashastra; Mughal administration; Legacy of British rule in politics and administration - 
Indianization of public services, revenue administration, district administration, local self-government. 
 
2. Philosophical and Constitutional framework of government: 
Salient features and value premises; Constitutiona lism; Political culture; Bureaucracy and democracy; 
Bureaucracy and development. 
 
3. Public Sector Undertakings: 
Public sector in modern India; Fo rms of Public Sector Undertakings; Problems of auto nomy, accountability 
and control; Impact of liberalization and privatization. 
 
4. Union Government and Administration: 
Executive, Parliament, Judiciary - structure, functio ns, work processes; Recent trends; Intragovernmental 
relations; Cabinet Secretariat; Prime Minister’s Office;  Central Secretariat; Ministries and Departments; 
Boards; Commissions; Attached offices; Field organizations. 
 
5. Plans and Priorities: 
Machinery of planning; Role, composition and functions of the Planning Commission and the National 
Development Council; ‘Indicative’ planning; Process of plan formulation at Union and State levels; 
Constitutional Amendments (1992) and decentralized planning for economic development and social justice. 
--- PAGE 73 ---
 
6. State Government and Administration: 
Union-State administrative, legisla tive and financial relations; Role of the Finance Commission; Governor; 
Chief Minister; Council of Ministers; Chief Secretary; State Secretariat; Directorates. 
 
7. District Administration since Independence: 
Changing role of the Collector; Unionstate-local relations; Imperatives of development management and law 
and order administration; District administration and democratic decentralization. 
 
8. Civil Services: 
Constitutional position; Structure, recruitment, training and capacity-building; Good governance initiatives; 
Code of conduct and discipline; Staff associations; Political rights; Grievance redressal mechanism; Civil 
service neutrality; Civil service activism. 
 
9. Financial Management: 
Budget as a political instrument; Parliamentary control of public expenditure; Role of finance ministry in 
monetary and fiscal area; Accounting techniques; Au dit; Role of Controller General of Accounts and 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
10. Administrative Reforms since Independence: 
Major concerns; Important Committees and Commissions; Reforms in financial management and human 
resource development; Problems of implementation.  
 
11. Rural Development: 
Institutions and agencies since independence; Rural development programmes: foci and strategies; 
Decentralization and Panchayati Raj; 73rd Constitutional amendment. 
 
12. Urban Local Government: 
Municipal governance: main features, structures, finance and problem areas; 74th Constitutional Amendment; 
Globallocal debate; New localism; Development dynamics, politics and administration with special reference 
to city management.  
 
13. Law and Order Administration: 
British legacy; National Police Commission; Investigative agencies; Role of central and state agencies 
including paramilitary forces in maintenance of law and order and countering insurgency and terrorism; 
Criminalisation of politics and administration; Police-public relations; Reforms in Police. 
 
14. Significant issues in Indian Administration: 
Values in public service; Regulatory Commissions; National Human Rights Commission; Problems of 
administration in coalition regimes; Citizen-administra tion interface; Corruption and administration; Disaster 
management. 
 
SOCIOLOGY 
PAPER - I 
FUNDAMENTALS OF SOCIOLOGY 
1. Sociology - The Discipline: 
(a) Modernity and social changes in Europe and emergence of sociology. 
(b) Scope of the subject and comparison with other social sciences. 
(c) Sociology and common sense. 
2. Sociology as Science: 
(a) Science, scientific method and critique. 
(b) Major theoretical strands of research methodology. 
(c) Positivism and its critique. 
(d) Fact value and objectivity. 
(e) Non- positivist methodologies. 
3. Research Methods and Analysis:  
(a) Qualitative and quantitative methods. 
(b) Techniques of data collection. 
(c) Variables, sampling, hypothesis, reliability and validity. 
4. Sociological Thinkers: 
(a) Karl Marx- Historical materialism, mode of production, alienation, class struggle. 
(b) Emile Durkheim- Division of labour, social fact, suicide, religion and society. 
(c) Max Weber- Social action, ideal types, authority, bureaucracy, protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism. 
(d) Talcolt Parsons- Social system, pattern variables. 
(e) Robert K. Merton- Latent and manifest functions, conformity and deviance, reference groups. 
--- PAGE 74 ---
(f) Mead - Self and identity. 
5. Stratification and Mobility: 
(a) Concepts- equality, inequality, hierarchy, exclusion, poverty and deprivation. 
(b) Theories of social stratification- Structural functionalist theory, Marxist theory, Weberian theory. 
(c) Dimensions – Social stratification of class, status groups, gender, ethnicity and race. 
(d) Social mobility- open and closed systems, types of mobility, sources and causes of mobility. 
6. Works and Economic Life: 
(a) Social organization of work in different types of society- slave society, feudal society, industrial /capitalist 
society. 
 
(b) Formal and informal organization of work. 
(c) Labour and society. 
7. Politics and Society: 
(a) Sociological theories of power. 
(b) Power elite, bureaucracy, pressure groups, and political parties. 
(c) Nation, state, citizenship, democracy, civil society, ideology. 
(d) Protest, agitation, social movements, collective action, revolution. 
8. Religion and Society: 
(a) Sociological theories of religion. 
(b) Types of religious practices: animism, monism, pluralism, sects, cults. 
(c) Religion in modern society: religion and science, secularization, religious revivalism, fundamentalism. 
9. Systems of Kinship: 
(a) Family, household, marriage. 
(b) Types and forms of family. 
(c) Lineage and descent. 
(d) Patriarchy and sexual division of labour. 
(e) Contemporary trends. 
10. Social Change in Modern Society: 
(a) Sociological theories of social change. 
(b) Development and dependency. 
(c) Agents of social change. 
(d) Education and social change. 
(e) Science, technology and social change. 
PAPER - II 
INDIAN SOCIETY : STRUCTURE AND CHANGE 
A. Introducing Indian Society: 
(i) Perspectives on the study of Indian society: 
(a) Indology (GS. Ghurye). 
(b) Structural functionalism (M N Srinivas). 
(c) Marxist sociology (A R Desai). 
(ii) Impact of colonial rule on Indian society : 
(a) Social background of Indian nationalism. 
(b) Modernization of Indian tradition. 
(c) Protests and movements during the colonial period. 
(d) Social reforms. 
B. Social Structure: 
(i) Rural and Agrarian Social Structure: 
(a) The idea of Indian village and village studies. 
(b) Agrarian social structure - evolution of land tenure system, land reforms. 
(ii) Caste System: 
(a) Perspectives on the study of caste systems: GS Ghurye, M N Srinivas, Louis Dumont, Andre Beteille.  
(b) Features of caste system.  
(c) Untouchability - forms and perspectives. 
(iii) Tribal communities in India: 
(a) Definitional problems. 
--- PAGE 75 ---
(b) Geographical spread. 
(c) Colonial policies and tribes. 
(d) Issues of integration and autonomy. 
(iv) Social Classes in India: 
(a) Agrarian class structure. 
(b) Industrial class structure. 
(c) Middle classes in India. 
(v) Systems of Kinship in India: 
(a) Lineage and descent in India. 
(b) Types of kinship systems. 
(c) Family and marriage in India. 
(d) Household dimensions of the family. 
(e) Patriarchy, entitlements and sexual division of labour. 
(vi) Religion and Society: 
(a) Religious communities in India. 
(b) Problems of religious minorities. 
C. Social Changes in India: 
(i) Visions of Social Change in India: 
(a) Idea of development planning and mixed economy. 
(b) Constitution, law and social change. 
(c) Education and social change. 
(ii) Rural and Agrarian transformation in India: 
(a) Programmes of rural development, Community Development Programme, cooperatives, poverty alleviation 
schemes. 
(b) Green revolution and social change. 
(c) Changing modes of production in Indian agriculture . 
(d) Problems of rural labour, bondage, migration. 
(iii) Industrialization and Urbanisation in India: 
(a) Evolution of modern industry in India. 
(b) Growth of urban settlements in India. 
(c) Working class: structure, growth, class mobilization. 
(d) Informal sector, child labour. 
(e) Slums and deprivation in urban areas. 
(iv) Politics and Society: 
(a) Nation, democracy and citizenship. 
(b) Political parties, pressure groups, social and political elite. 
(c) Regionalism and decentralization of power. 
(d) Secularization. 
(v) Social Movements in Modern India: 
(a) Peasants and farmers movements. 
(b) Women’s movement. 
(c) Backward classes & Dalit movement. 
(d) Environmental movements. 
(e) Ethnicity and Identity movements. 
(vi) Population Dynamics: 
(a) Population size, growth, composition and distribution. 
(b) Components of population growth: birth, death, migration. 
(c) Population policy and family planning. 
(d) Emerging issues: ageing, sex ratios, child and infant mortality, reproductive health. 
(vii) Challenges of Social Transformation: 
(a) Crisis of development: displacement, environmental problems and sustainability. 
(b) Poverty, deprivation and inequalities. 
(c) Violence against women. 
(d) Caste conflicts. 
--- PAGE 76 ---
(e) Ethnic conflicts, communalism, religious revivalism. 
(f) Illiteracy and disparities in education. 
 
 
 
 
STATISTICS 
PAPER - I 
1. Probability: 
Sample space and events, probability measure and pr obability space, random variable as a measurable 
function, distribution function of a random variable, discrete and continuous-type random variable, probability 
mass function, probability density function, vector-valued random variable, marginal and conditional 
distributions, stochastic independence of events and of random variables, expectation and moments of a 
random variable, conditional expectation, convergence of a sequence of random variable in distribution, in 
probability, in p-th mean and almost everywhere, their criteria and inter-relations, Chebyshev’s inequality and 
Khintchine‘s weak law of large numbers, strong law of large numbers and Kolmogoroff’s theorems, 
probability generating function, moment generating func tion, characteristic function, inversion theorem, 
Linderberg and Levy forms of central limit theorem, standard discrete and continuous probability distributions. 
 
2. Statistical Inference: 
Consistency, unbiasedness, efficiency , sufficiency, completeness, ancillary statistics, factorization theorem, 
exponential family of distribution and its properties, uniformly minimum variance unbiased (UMVU) 
estimation, Rao-Blackwell and Lehmann-Scheffe theore ms, Cramer-Rao inequality for single parameter. 
Estimation by methods of moments, maximum likelihood, least squares, minimum chi-square and modified 
minimum chi-square, properties of maximum likelihood and other estimators, asymptotic efficiency, prior and 
posterior distributions, loss function, risk function, and minimax estimator. Bayes estimators. 
 
Non-randomised and randomised tests, critical func tion, MP tests, Neyman-Pearson lemma, UMP tests, 
monotone likelihood ratio, similar and unbiased tests, UMPU tests for single parameter likelihood ratio test and 
its asymptotic distribution. Confidence bounds and its relation with tests.  
 
Kolmogoroff’s test for goodness of fit and its consistency, sign test and its optimality.  
Wilcoxon signed-ranks test and its consistency, Kolmogorov-Smirnov two-sample test, run test, Wilcoxon-
Mann-Whitney test and median test, their consistency and asymptotic normality. 
 
Wald’s SPRT and its properties, OC and ASN functions fo r tests regarding parameters for Bernoulli, Poisson, 
normal and exponential distributions. Wald’s fundamental identity. 
 
3. Linear Inference and Multivariate Analysis: 
Linear statistical models’, theory of least squares an d analysis of variance, Gauss-Markoff theory, normal 
equations, least squares estimates and their precision, test of significance and interval estimates based on least 
squares theory in one-way, two-way and three-way classified data, regr ession analysis, linear regression, 
curvilinear regression and orthogonal polynomials, mul tiple regression, multiple and partial correlations, 
estimation of variance and covarian ce components, multivariate normal di stribution, Mahalanobis-D2 and 
Hotelling’s T2 statistics and their applications and properties, discriminant analysis, canonical correlations, 
principal component analysis. 
 
4. Sampling Theory and Design of Experiments: 
An outline of fixed-population and superpopulation approaches, distinctive features of finite population 
sampling, probability sampling designs, simple random  sampling with and without replacement, stratified 
random sampling, systematic sampling and its efficacy , cluster sampling, twostage and multi-stage sampling, 
ratio and regression methods of esti mation involving one or more auxilia ry variables, tw o-phase sampling, 
probability proportional to size sampling with and without replacemen t, the Hansen-Hurwitz and the Horvitz-
Thompson estimators, non-negative variance estimation w ith reference to the Horvitz-Thompson estimator, 
non-sampling errors. 
 
Fixed effects model (two-way classification) random and mixed effects models (two-way classification with 
equal observation per cell), CRD, RBD, LSD and their an alyses, incomplete block designs, concepts of 
orthogonality and balance, BIBD, missing plot technique, factorial experiments and 2n and 32, confounding in 
factorial experiments, split-plot and simple lattice designs, transformation of data Duncan’s multiple range test. 
 
PAPER - II 
1. Industrial Statistics: 
Process and product control, general theory of control charts, different types of control charts for variables and 
attributes, X, R, s, p, np and c charts, cumulative su m chart. Single, double, multiple and sequential sampling 
plans for attributes, OC, ASN, AOQ and ATI curves, concepts of producer’s and consumer’s risks, AQL, 
LTPD and AOQL, Sampling plans for variables, Use of Dodge-Roming tables. 
 
Concept of reliability, failure rate and reliability functions, reliability of series and parallel systems and other 
simple configurations, renewal density and renewal func tion, Failure models: exponential, Weibull, normal, 
lognormal. 
 
Problems in life testing, censored and truncated experiments for exponential models. 
--- PAGE 77 ---
2. Optimization Techniques: 
Different types of models in Operations Research, their construction and general methods of solution, 
simulation and Monte-Carlo methods formulation of linear programming (LP) problem, simple LP model and 
its graphical solution, the simplex procedure, the tw o-phase method and the M-technique with artificial 
variables, the duality theory of LP and its economic interpretation, sensitivity analysis, transportation and 
assignment problems, rectangular games, twoperson zero-sum games, methods of solution (graphical and 
algebraic). 
 
Replacement of failing or deteriorating items, group and individual  replacement policies, concept of scientific 
inventory management and analytical structure of inventory problems, simple models with deterministic and 
stochastic demand with and without lead time, storage models with particular reference to dam type. 
 
Homogeneous discrete-time Markov chains, transition pr obability matrix, classification of states and ergodic 
theorems, homogeneous continuous-time Markov chains, Poisson process, elements of queuing theory, M/M/1, 
M/M/K, G/M/1 and M/G/1 queues. 
 
Solution of statistical problems on computers using well-known statistical software packages like SPSS. 
3. Quantitative Economics and Official Statistics: 
Determination of trend, seasonal and cyclical components, Box-Jenkins method, tests for stationary series, 
ARIMA models and determination of orders of autoregressive and moving average components, forecasting. 
 
Commonly used index numbersLaspeyre’s, Paasche’s and Fisher’s ideal index numbers, chain-base index 
number, uses and limitations of index numbers, index number of wholesale prices, consumer prices, 
agricultural production and industrial production, test for index numbers proportionality, time-reversal, factor-
reversal and circular .  
 
General linear model, ordinary least square and generalized least squares methods of estimation, problem of 
multi-collinearity, consequences and solutions of mult- icollinearity, auto-correlation and its consequences, 
heteroscedasticity of disturbances and its testing, test for independence of disturbances, concept of structure 
and model for simultaneous equations, problem of identification-rank and order conditions of identifiability, 
two-stage  least square method of estimation. 
 
Present official statistical system in India relating to population, agriculture, industrial production, trade and 
prices, methods of collection of offi cial statistics, their reliability a nd limitations, principal publications 
containing such statistics, various official agencies responsible for data collection and their main functions. 
 
4. Demography and Psychometry: 
Demographic data from census, registration, NSS othe r surveys, their limitations and uses, definition, 
construction and uses of vital rates and ratios, meas ures of fertility, reproduction rates, morbidity rate, 
standardized death rate, complete and abridged life tabl es, construction of life tables from vital statistics and 
census returns, uses of life tables, logistic and other population growth curves, fitting a logistic curve, 
population 
projection, stable population, quasi-stable population,  techniques in estimation of demographic parameters, 
standard classification by cause of death, health surveys and use of hospital statistics. 
 
Methods of standardisation of scales and tests, Z- scores, standard scores, T- scores, percentile scores, 
intelligence quotient and its measurement and uses, validity and reliability of test scores and its determination, 
use of factor analysis and path analysis in psychometry. 
 
ZOOLOGY 
PAPER – I 
1. Non-chordata and Chordata: 
(a) Classification and relationship of various phyla up to subclasses: Acoelomate and Coelomate, Protostomes 
and Deuterostomes, Bilateria and Radiata; Status of Protista, Parazoa, Onychophora and Hemichordata; 
Symmetry. 
 
(b) Protozoa: Locomotion, nutrition, reproduction, sex; General features  and life history of Paramaecium, 
Monocystis, Plasmodium and Leishmania.  
 
(c) Porifera: Skeleton, canal system and reproduction. 
(d) Cnidaria: Polymorphism, defensive structures and their mechanism; coral reefs and their formation; 
metagenesis; general features and life history of Obelia and Aurelia. 
 
(e) Platyhelminthes: Parasitic adaptation; general featur es and life history of Fasciola and Taenia and their 
pathogenic symptoms. 
 
(f) Nemathelminthes: General features, life history, parasitic adaptation of Ascaris and Wuchereria. 
(g) Annelida: Coelom and metamerism; modes of life in  polychaetes; general features and life history of 
Nereis, 
earthworm and leach.  
(h) Arthropoda: Larval forms and parasitism in Crus tacea; vision and respiratio n in arthro pods (Prawn, 
cockroach and scorpion); modification of mouth parts in insects (cockroach, mosquito, housefly, honey bee 
and butterfly); metamorphosis in insect and its hormonal regulation, social behaviour of Apis and termites. 
 
(i) Mollusca: Feeding, respiration, locomotion, general features and life history of Lamellidens, Pila and Sepia, 
torsion and detorsion in gastropods. 
--- PAGE 78 ---
 
(j) Echinodermata: Feeding, respiration, locomotion, larval forms, general features and life history of Asterias. 
(k) Protochordata: Origin of chordates; general features and life history of Branchiostoma and Herdmania. 
(l) Pisces: Respiration, locomotion and migration. 
(m) Amphibia: Origin of tetrapods, parental care, paedomorphosis. 
(n) Reptilia: Origin of reptiles, skull types, status of Sphenodon and crocodiles. 
(o) Aves: Origin of birds, flight adaptation, migration. 
(p) Mammalia: Origin of mammals, dentition, general features of egg laying mammals, pouched-mammals, 
aquatic mammals and primates, endocrine glands (pituitary , thyroid, parathyroid, adrenal, pancreas, gonads) 
and their interrelationships. 
 
(q) Comparative functional anatomy of various systems of vertebrates (integument and its derivatives, 
endoskeleton, locomotory organs, digestive system, respiratory system, ci rculatory system including heart and 
aortic arches, urino-genital system, brain and sense organs (eye and ear). 
 
2. Ecology: 
(a) Biosphere: Concept of biosphere; biomes, Biogeochemical cycles, Human induced changes in atmosphere 
including green house effect, ecological succession, biomes and ecotones, community ecology. 
(b) Concept of ecosystem; structure and function of ecosystem, types of ecosyst em, ecological succession, 
ecological adaptation. 
 
(c) Population; characteristics, population dynamics, population stabilization. 
(d) Biodiversity and diversity conservation of natural resources. 
(e) Wildlife of India. 
(f) Remote sensing for sustainable development. 
(g) Environmental biodegradation, pollution and its impact on biosphere and its prevention. 
3. Ethology: 
(a) Behaviour: Sensory filtering, reponsive-ness, sign stimuli, learning and memory, instinct, habituation, 
conditioning, imprinting. 
 
(b) Role of hormones in drive; role of pheromones in al arm spreading; crypsis, pred ator detection, predator 
tactics, social hierarchies in primates, social organization in insects. 
 
(c) Orientation, navigation, homing, biological rhythms, biological clock, tidal, seasonal and circadian 
rhythms. 
(d) Methods of studying animal behaviour including sexual conflict, selfishness, kinship and altruism. 
4. Economic Zoology: 
(a) Apiculture, sericulture, lac culture, carp culture, pearl culture, prawn culture, vermiculture. 
(b) Major infectious and communicable  diseases (malaria, filaria, tube rculosis, cholera and AIDS) their 
vectors, pathogens and prevention. 
 
(c) Cattle and livestock diseases, their pathogen (helminthes) and vectors (ticks, mites, Tabanus, Stomoxys). 
(d) Pests of sugar cane (Pyrilla perpusiella) oil seed (Achaea janata) and rice (Sitophilus oryzae). 
(e) Transgenic animals. 
(f) Medical biotechnology, human genetic disease and genetic counselling, gene therapy. 
(g) Forensic biotechnology. 
5. Biostatistics: 
Designing of experiments; null hypothesis; correlation, regression, distribution and measure of central 
tendency, chi square, student-test, F-test (one-way & two-way Ftest). 
 
6. Instrumentation Methods: 
(a) Spectrophotometer, phase contrast  and fluorescence microscopy, radio active tracer, ultra centrifuge, gel 
electrophoresis, PCR, ELISA, FISH and chromosome painting. 
 
(b) Electron microscopy (TEM, SEM).  
PAPER - II 
1. Cell Biology: 
(a) Structure and function of cell and its organelles ( nucleus, plasma membrane, mitochondria, Golgi bodies, 
endoplasmic reticulum, ribosomes, and lysosomes), cell division (mitosis and meiosis), mitotic spindle and 
mitotic apparatus, chromosome movements, chromosome type polytene and lambrush, organization of 
chromatin, heterochromatin, Cell cycle regulation. 
 
(b) Nucleic acid topology, DNA motif, DNA replication, transcription, R NA processing, translation, protein 
foldings and transport. 
 
2. Genetics: 
--- PAGE 79 ---
(a) Modern concept of gene, split gene, genetic regulation, genetic code.  
(b) Sex chromosomes and their evolution, sex determination in Drosophila and man. 
(c) Mendel’s laws of inheritance, recombination, linka ge, multiple alleles, genetics of blood groups, pedigree 
analysis, hereditary diseases in man.  
 
(d) Mutations and mutagenesis. 
(e) Recombinant DNA technology; plasmid, cosmid, ar tificial chromosomes as vectors, transgenic, DNA 
cloning and whole animal cloning (principles and methods). 
 
(f) Gene regulation and expression in prokaryotes and eukaryotes. 
(g) Signal molecules, cell death, defects in signaling pathway and consequences. 
(h) RFLP, RAPD and AFLP and application of RFLP in DNA finger printing, ribozyme technologies, human 
genome project, genomics and protomics. 
 
3. Evolution: 
(a) Theories of origin of life. 
(b) Theories of evolution; Natural selection, role of mutations in evolution, evolutionary patterns, molecular 
drive, 
mimicry, variation, isolation and speciation.  
(c) Evolution of horse, elephant and man using fossil data. 
(d) Hardy-Weinberg Law.  
(e) Continental drift and distribution of animals. 
4. Systematics: 
Zoological nomenclature, international code, cladistics, molecular taxonomy and biodiversity. 
5. Biochemistry: 
(a) Structure and role of carbohydrates, fats, fatty acids and cholesterol, proteins and amino-acids, nucleic 
acids. Bioenergetics. 
 
b) Glycolysis and Kreb cycle, oxidation and reduction, oxidative phosphorylation, energy conservation and 
release, ATP cycle, cyclic AMP – its structure and role. 
 
(c) Hormone classification (steroid and peptide hormones), biosynthesis and functions. 
(d) Enzymes: types and mechanisms of action. 
(e) Vitamins and co-enzymes  
(f) Immunoglobulin and immunity. 
6. Physiology (with special reference to mammals): 
(a) Composition and constituents of blood; blood groups and Rh factor in man, factors and mechanism of 
coagulation, iron metabolism, acid-base balance, thermo-regulation, anticoagulants. 
 
(b) Haemoglobin: Composition, types and role in transport of oxygen and carbon dioxide. 
(c) Digestion and absorption: Role of salivary glands, liver, pancreas and intestinal glands. 
(d) Excretion: nephron and regulation of urine formation; osmo-regulation and excretory product.  
(e) Muscles: Types, mechanism of contraction of skeletal muscles, effects of exercise on muscles. 
(f) Neuron: nerve impulse – its conduction and synaptic transmission, neurotransmitters.  
(g) Vision, hearing and olfaction in man. 
(h) Physiology of reproduction, puberty and menopause in human. 
7. Developmental Biology: 
(a) Gametogenesis; spermatogenesis, composition of se men, in vitro and in vivo capacitation of mammalian 
sperm, Oogenesis, totipotency; fertilization, morphogene sis and morphogen, blastogenesis, establishment of 
body axes formation, fate map, gestulation in frog and chick; genes in development in chick, homeotic genes, 
development of eye and heart, placenta in mammals.  
 
(b) Cell lineage, cell-to cell interaction, Genetic and indu ced teratogenesis, role of thyroxine in control of 
metamorphosis in amphibia, paedogenesis and neoteny, cell death, aging.  
 
(c) Developmental genes in man, in vitro fertilization and embryo transfer, cloning. 
(d) Stem cells: Sources, types and their use in human welfare.  
(e) Biogenetic law.  
 
 
 
 
 